STOP ELECTING LIFE PEERS
By TREVOR WILLIAMS
A MOVE to stop Mr. Gaitskell from nominating any more Labour
life Peers is to be made at a meeting of Labour M Ps tomorrow.
he is to be backed by Mr. Will Griffiths, M P for Manchester
of Labour M Ps are likely to turn down the Foot-Griffiths
ABOLISH LORDS
Mr. Foot's line will be that as Labour M Ps opposed the
He believes that the House of Lords should be abolished and that
Since 1958, 13 Labour life Peers and Peeresses have been created.
Most Labour sentiment would still favour the abolition of the
House of Lords, but while it remains Labour has to have an adequate
number of members.
By DENNIS NEWSON
THE two rival African Nationalist Parties of Northern Rhodesia
have agreed to get together to face the challenge from Sir Roy
Welensky, the Federal Premier.
Delegates from Mr. Kenneth Kaunda's United National
Independence Party (280,000 members) and Mr. Harry Nkumbula's
African National Congress (400,000) will meet in London today to
Sir Roy is violently opposed to Africans getting an elected
Macleod, is insisting on a policy of change.
Said Mr. Nkumbula last night: We want to discuss what to do
if the British Government gives in to Sir Roy and the talks fall
Yesterday Sir Roy's chief aide, Mr. Julius Greenfield,
telephoned his chief a report on his talks with Mr. Macmillan at
plans to the Africans and Liberals attending.
are seeking. African delegates are studying them today.
The conference will meet to discuss the function of a proposed
By HUGH PILCHER
Commons last night that there have been secret negotiations on
by the two main settlers' parties &mdash; the United Federal Party and the
Central African Federation, went to Chequers at the week-end for talks
with Mr. Macmillan. Northern Rhodesia is a member of the
He said Britain had an obligation to consult the Federal
Government. But the final decision remained with the British
Roy had no right to delay progress in the talks by refusing to sit
round the conference table.
attend the talks because Sir Roy had found messages sent from the
Mr. Julius Greenfield. He was at Chequers last week-end.
PRESIDENT KENNEDY today defended the appointment of a Negro
anti-Negro senators of the Deep South.
The negro is Mr. Robert Weaver of New York. One of his tasks
State housing projects.
that Weaver once had Communist affiliations.
Kennedy saying he had received several complaints about Weaver's
loyalty.
He said these concerned Mr. Weaver's alleged association with
organisations black-listed by the Government.
Immediately Mr. Kennedy rushed a letter to Senator Robertson
saying the Federal Bureau of Investigation had reported on Mr.
Weaver.
Senator Robertson's committee has to pass Mr. Weaver's
GERMANY MUST PAY
cash offer to help America's balance of payments position.
Government would try to get Germany to pay more.
German Chancellor. But he said discussions on a higher level than
in the past might be useful.
The President will probably discuss the problem with Dr.
Brentano, the West German Foreign Minister, who is due in Washington
A big slice of Germany's aid is the early payment of a
Tough spot
The Adenauer Government flatly rejected attempts by the
These support costs are a big drain on America's dollar reserves.
Dr. Adenauer's answer is the once-and-for-all cash offer of
President Kennedy's rejection of it is a painful blow to the West
It will now have to pay more &mdash; and increase taxation to do so &mdash;
or run the obvious risks in upsetting the new American administration.
And, since this is election year in West Germany, Dr. Adenauer
is in a tough spot.
Waiting
military aides to come up with the answer on February 20.
behind Russia in nuclear development.
President Kennedy did his best to avoid giving Pressmen a direct
HORRIFIED
That's a Tory doctor's reaction to the new health charges, says
PROBE THE DRUG PROFITS AND DON'T TAKE IT OUT OF MOTHERS AND
CHILDREN
Brown and Mr. Enoch Powell, the Health Minister.
Mr. Brown, passionate and warm-hearted, led Labour's attack
on the higher health charges. Mr. Powell, white-faced and outwardly
unemotional, replied with a statistical statement &mdash; and ended by
The result of the vote was not in doubt. For the Tories were
massed in answer to their whips to defeat a censure motion on the
THE LETTER
He quoted from this letter which Mr. Gaitskell had received:
My background is a doctor of 68, who has practised medicine
I am a lifelong Conservative. I am horrified and amazed by my
party's proposal to prostitute the whole principle of the State
service and to render that service a hardship to poor people.
After a lifetime of helping others and healing the sick, my
Mr. Brown went on: We are dealing with a noble edifice
fiddling about with bills of cost.
patient at the point of need and with one standard for all sick
He told them that their conception of social services was wholly
They would provide an ambulance service for the absolutely
Answering jeers that it was Labour which first put a ceiling on
health spending and started charges, Mr. Brown reminded the hostile
Government benches that was done in 1950 because of the financial
expenditure, health had fallen from 28.5 to 23.1 per cent.
He demanded that instead of taking it out of the patients Mr.
whose profits had risen by up to 400 per cent. in the last eight
children and sick people than to take on this vast industry, Mr.
Let us have a full inquiry into the cost of drugs and the
The health of children today owed much to the welfare food
minute &mdash; and even his bitterest opponents on defence joined in.
THE CHOICE
for improving the hospital service, on which indeed the Government is
after the proposed changes the net cost of the service to the
Exchequer will have increased over three years by 20 per cent.
or an adjustment being made in financing.
The Government decided to adjust the financing &mdash; which Mr.
Powell claimed was underpinning &mdash; not undermining &mdash; the service.
Mr. Powell said that all these foods would still be free in families
receiving regular National Assistance grants.
more of a burden than a 1s. charge was in 1949.
RESIGN
Uproar from the Labour side grew as Mr. Powell made more and
more claims with which M Ps disagreed.
MR. MACMILLAN has picked a strong brains trust team to
negotiate terms for joining the Common Market.
month to smooth the way.
but no more than that. So the idea of a personal mission by the Prime
Instead Mr. Macmillan will rely on a hand-picked team under the
back Mr. Edward Heath, Lord Privy Seal, who is charged with the
conduct of negotiations with the Six.
Governments every facility possible to safeguard their interests.
Seven Commonwealth countries have told Mr. Sandys, Commonwealth
Relations Secretary, that they wish to be kept in touch in London.
fields.
backstage negotiator since his days as Britain's chief UN
delegate.
Second in command is Mr. Eric Roll, 53-year-old Deputy
Secretary at the Ministry of Agriculture, Food, and Fisheries.
who has taken part in all the detailed Common Market exchanges over
Other leading members are: Sir Henry Lintott from the
Commonwealth Relations Office, Sir William Corell-Barnes (Colonial
Office), Mr. G. R. Bell (Treasury), and Mr. G. H.
They will accompany Mr. Heath next month when he goes to
Brussels, headquarters of the Common Market Commission, or wherever
the Six decide negotiations should be held.
Paris between M. Couve \de Murville, French Foreign Minister, and
Mr. Heath.
seems fated to fly into trouble abroad.
Now we have the strikes and demonstrations in Ghana coinciding
the first to be held in Africa.
Only a few hours after Mr Lloyd and his 24-strong delegation
landed at Accra this morning, hundreds of shop assistants demonstrated
The stores had been hit by the same strike wave that has
paralysed the port of Takoradi for the past week.
Root of the discontent: The austerity Budget, including a
professes to know when he will return.
But in his absence his chief lieutenants have not let him down.
is now beginning to tell.
is the supreme law) reports: The Government has been urged to
Tawia Adamafio, and others.
state of emergency was declared, giving the Government adequate
anyone who publishes a report likely to cause alarm or prejudicial
convicted of sabotage.
are still holding out despite the presence of 1,400 police and 16
And how did the Government react when the strikers demonstrated
toughest man in Mr. Nkrumah's team, drove up to the Kingsway Stores
and faced the demonstrators, most of them shopgirls in overalls.
the muster from the 13 States of the Commonwealth was an occasion
worthy of his presence.
After all it was Mr. Nkrumah who suggested that this year the
Minister, to do the honours as host, in which capacity he held a
POLICE, on direct orders from the Cabinet, are openly
It alleged:
Phones were being tapped and going out of action;
Police were visiting people on no pretext whatsoever,
except to pass the time of day;
committee was going too far; another that anti-apartheid agitation was
was watched for four days by plain-clothes men.
Committee-member Mr. George Clark commented at a Press
including Lord Russell, Lady Russell, Lord Boyd-Orr, the Rev.
They are required to show why they should not be bound over for
disturbing the peace and for inciting a breach of the peace. The
conduct.
Lord Russell, 89, was putting his affairs in order, and packing a
Mr. Ralph Schoenman, said: He is not going to agree to be bound
members tried a plant call on a suspect phone. They discussed a
Sir Roy attacks Kaunda's vicious monster
Sir Roy, Federal Rhodesian Prime Minister, said that Mr.
The record of lawlessness among UNIP supporters went
back a long way, Sir Roy told the Federal Parliament in Salisbury.
been arrested or convicted since last year on charges of creating
During the first three weeks of the present trouble 287
incidents had been reported in Northern Rhodesia.
More than 500 people &mdash; 167 of them members of the UNIP &mdash;
said Sir Roy.
faith.
He said Mr. Kaunda must know that his statements had stimulated
Rhodesia when his followers have indulged in such violence.
that if UNIP did not get its way what would happen would make
the Mau Mau in Kenya seem like a child's picnic.
JOHN DICKIE writes: Mr. Macmillan gave top priority to the
clash over Northern Rhodesia on his return from Scotland yesterday.
He summoned Mr. Iain Macleod, Colonial Secretary, and Mr.
Duncan Sandys, Commonwealth Relations Secretary for an hour's talks at
Admiralty House.
modifications to the new Constitution provided law and order is
Roy Welensky to any suggestion that there may be fresh concessions to
Northern Rhodesian Liberal leader, and Mr. Kaunda, that the bulk of
in Uganda arrived for talks with Colonial Secretary Mr. Iain
Macleod, before the Uganda Constitutional conference opens next
Monday. The question: Their status in an independent Uganda.
The thorniest problem for next week's conference is to settle the
attending the actual conference, although Buganda politicians have
agreed to do so at the last minute.
conference's proposals. Then their views will be transmitted back.
Russell jailed but ban-the-bomb fight goes on
750 extra police will bar Sunday squatters
Ban-the-Bomb demonstrators.
Police leave has been cancelled and secret plans prepared to
Parliament-square by the Committee of 100, the anti-nuclear arms
It was Mr. Butler who authorised action which ended yesterday
in 32 members of the Committee of 100 being imprisoned for inciting a
The possibility that the Government might invoke the Public
demonstrators sit down or not &mdash; was being discussed in Whitehall last
Today Mr. Butler will have talks with Police Commissioner Sir
Joseph Simpson to draw up final plans for the Battle of Parliament
area &mdash; West End Central, Bow-street, and Cannon-row.
MR. TOURE IN ZAGREB
FROM OUR OWN CORRESPONDENT
VIENNA, Jan. 9
Zagreb, where crowds of people welcomed the Yugoslav leader's guest,
by the Yugoslav leader as an emphasis on Yugoslavia's affinity with
the conference at Casablanca, the Yugoslav press has written much on
the significance of the meeting of leaders of Africa, placing
Mr. S&eacute;kou Tour&eacute;'s stay in Yugoslavia is one in the series
of forthcoming visits of neutralist leaders from those continents, and
of those countries. Today, for example, the Foreign Minister of
Minister.
CONFERENCE FAVOURED
intensified in the past year or so and though so far, apart from joint
The wish was particularly apparent in comments on the occasion of
the conference in Casablanca and, in particular, in Yugoslav approval
of the idea of an inter-African consultative assembly which would
coordinate activity on the political and economic sphere; and it is
not difficult to see that President Tito would like some such idea
extended also to the whole uncommitted world.
But he now feels, in view of a changed international situation
REQUEST TO RETURN
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT
SAIGON, Jan. 9
have arrived in Phnom Penh, Cambodia, to invite Prince Souvanna
Phouma, the former Prime Minister, to return to Laos. No details of
that Prince Boun Oum was considering asking Prince Souvanna Phouma to
Prince Souvanna Phouma has not yet replied to the mission, but
His policy of strict neutrality from 1951 to 1958 kept the
kingdom in peace, though at the cost of virtual partition of the
country into the pro-communist north and the pro-western centre and
Pholsena, who claims to be his representative in Laos, yesterday
addressed all officers of the pro-communist forces occupying the
province of Xieng Khouang and emphasized that Prince Souvanna's
Prince Souphannouvong, leader of the pro-communist Neo Lao Haksat
Party, also spoke to the officers in the same terms. This emphasis on
with the political and military leadership of the pro-communists.
pro-communists' former base 60 miles north of Vientiane, but this
claim had been made before the end of last month. A correspondent who
OTTAWA
With the Prime Minister sunning himself in Jamaica and his
Cabinet out in the grass roots making 160 speeches in 80
constituencies in 10 days, the Liberal Party are holding a national
In some ways it will be a testing occasion for him, although some
sight to supplant him. So the conference will concentrate on laying
the foundations on which to win the next election.
The rally comes at a time when in spite of carefully worded
expectancy. Members of the Cabinet are basing their speeches on a new
Last year saw the defeat of two Conservative provincial
governments, Quebec and New Brunswick, and in the four federal
Columbia, one in Leeds, Ontario, and the other two in the Maritimes &mdash;
per cent were in favour of The Grits if a federal election had
been held last autumn, 38 per cent for the Conservatives and 12 per
individual leader (for Mr. Diefenbaker 36 per cent, for Mr.
How far is Mr. Lester Pearson acceptable to the people of
Canada as a Prime Minister? Many observers at the national rally will
be seeking an answer. It is difficult for many to see Mr. Pearson
remains that the Liberal leader is still the diplomatist, more at home
in the chancery, or the corridors of the United Nations, not the
many still regard him as some sort of cross between an egghead and a
missionary.
being coached by speech experts. Everything is being done to promote
a new image. Certainly, he is now a much tougher character
politically than when he took over the leadership. He was mercilessly
given him by the Government in recent sessions, he is leading the
Opposition with skill and assurance and is a match for the Prime
Mr. Pearson is now talking about his new and dynamic
liberalism and this week will show perhaps how far Mike will
Canada to the problems of the Atlantic provinces.
However, be this election year or not, Mr. Pearson, with his
BONN DOUBTS ON EUROPEAN SPACE PROJECT
MR. THORNEYCROFT'S TASK TO REMOVE SCEPTICISM
Mr. Thorneycroft, the Minister of Aviation, who arrives in Bonn
tomorrow for talks with the Federal Government on a European space
satellite project, will find the Germans interested in the principle
of space research, but rather sceptical about British plans for
this is not primarily an effort on Britain's part to salve Blue
Streak, which was abandoned last summer as a military project; or that
character.
Mr. Thorneycroft's main purpose will be to remove these doubts,
and to persuade the Federal Government that the financial burden
involved is really worth while, at a time when any increase in
rise in taxation &mdash; something no one is prepared to contemplate in an
election year.
The cost of the European satellite project is estimated to be
at least &pound;60m. spread over five years. A Foreign Ministry
had not signed a resolution adopted at an international conference in
convention on a space satellite project.
Federal Government is not convinced, on the basis of the information
it has so far, that such a project would be justified from a
On the specific question of the use of Blue Streak, Mr.
Thorneycroft's task will be easier. He can point out that this is the
only rocket and launcher in Europe to have reached a sufficient stage
satellite into outer space. There has also been some talk of adopting
MISSILE FEARS
contravene the provisions of the Brussels treaty. The Foreign
been concluded, and only cooperation on the type of capsule was
involved.
any budget under which funds could be appropriated.
Meanwhile, Professor Eugen Sa"nger, chairman of the German
representative of the Federal Government, together with experts from
OTHER VENTURES
various plans for joint research and development of military items,
Macmillan to join the Common Market during their talks at Admiralty
House, Whitehall, yesterday.
British Prime Minister of the outcome of his recent visit to Paris.
There General \de Gaulle had made clear that he would accept
Britain into the Common Market only if there were no conditions laid
unconditional surrender.
LAOS, BERLIN
There were also brief discussions on Laos, Berlin and other
his discussions with Mr. Krushchov.
With the exception of 40 minutes when Lord Home, Foreign
An attempt to get more information about the Admiralty House
broadcast and television report on his talks with Mr. Krushchov this
evening.
The joint communique on Mr. Kennedy's and Mr. Macmillan's
third talks &mdash; the first were at Key West, Florida, the second in
Their discussions covered the major problems, both economic and
and expansion in the general interests of developed and underdeveloped
It said that the President and Premier noted with
satisfaction the agreement in Vienna on the need for an effective
Laos ceasefire, which should lead to progress toward a Laos agreement
The situation in regard to Germany was reviewed, and there was
Apart from their formal Admiralty House talks, followed by lunch
given by Lady Dorothy Macmillan with Mrs. Kennedy and other guests
PESSIMISTIC
In PARIS, Mr. Dean Rusk, U.S. Secretary of State,
From Nato headquarters Mr. Rusk went to see President \de
Gaulle and informed him of the Vienna outcome. Last night Mr. Rusk
In DUESSELDORF, Chancellor Adenauer said the Vienna talks
might be the beginning of a slight improvement, but no big
MR K GETS HOME IN HIGH SPIRITS
Krushchov yesterday returned to Moscow after his two days of talks
with President Kennedy, writes Dennis Ogden from Moscow.
The good beginning made at Vienna must be followed up by new
efforts for peace, the Soviet Communist Party newspaper Pravda
cold war, and to all who are striving for a stable peace, write the
people will say a good beginning.
Brezhnev in welcoming Dr. Sukarno, President and Prime Minister of
Indonesia, who arrived by Boeing 707 jet on a state visit 40 minutes
after Mr. Khrushchov had arrived from Vienna.
A cheering, delighted crowd of Indonesian students broke through
crash barriers to surround their President on the tarmac for several
FAREWELL SPEECH
In VIENNA, before flying off to Moscow, Mr. Khrushchov
said he hoped his weekend talks with President Kennedy would help to
the Soviet Premier thanked Austria for the hospitality and welcome he
settlement of international disputes through negotiations, he said.
Gaitskell defends Polaris, Nato and himself
MR. GAITSKELL today delivered a full-blooded defence of
Britain, that Britain must depend on Nato and the West must have
Addressing the annual congress of the National Union of General
Obviously conscious of the fierce and widespread resentment over
the U.S. Polaris base in Britain, Mr. Gaitskell said that he
even noticed that supporters of unilateral nuclear disarmament were
changing their tactics by switching most of their emphasis on to the
missile.
facilities to nations to which it was allied. But governments should
The Labour Party opposed Thor missiles, because, he said, they
them too.
It was far better for a weapon used for retaliatory purposes to
did not think it right to oppose the Polaris depot ship.
The party agreed that it was unwise to locate the base in the
It should be sited in a more remote area.
Mr. Gaitskell added that the Scarborough conference decisions
did not, in his view, truly reflect the opinions of the majority of
defence and security of our country.
retaliate had stopped a U.S. attack upon the Soviet Union, Mr.
aggressive nuclear war was the certainty that they would be
annihilated.
not possible, though he respected their views.
the emphasis of their intervention away from straight opposition to
To Mr. Macmillan, Mr. Gaitskell said the Prime Minister
should begin to take seriously the danger of the spread of nuclear
weapons within the Nato alliance.
He thought, he said, that the Soviet Union would be prepared to
Mr. Gaitskell concluded, declaring that the present was the
beginning of a great period of opportunity for the party. It was a
great chance that should be grasped.
for wages and other major questions, Mr. Jack Cooper, president,
declared when congress opened.
He complained that the gap between earnings of manual workers
payments agreed at local level. Local negotiations and bargaining by
branch officers and shop stewards had come to stay and some way must
be found to integrate and co-ordinate their activities in official
The General Council of the Trades Union Congress should therefore
regrouping of unions and the modification of their structures to meet
Mr. Cooper argued that a common industrial contribution was
Suggesting that a total T.U.C. membership of eight million
Earl Russell, President of the Committee of 100, told Kennedy
that he should take notice of that very large and growing section
planned.
these should carry weight with the U.S. Government, Earl Russell
suggested.
hitherto cordial relations between the U.S. and Great Britain,
Earl Russell says it is inevitable, though profoundly
some antagonism to the policy of the United States.
the people of Great Britain; in a time of crisis it would probably
control over the action of Polaris submarines.
there is a Polaris base in Britain the Soviet Union might retaliate
against Britain alone.
Such retaliation might, and probably would, destroy the whole
population of Britain in the course of, at the most, an hour
Earl Russell believes: It is very questionable whether British
contrary, they impose upon America an onerous obligation which it may
prove impossible to fulfil.
world &mdash; East and West and uncommitted nations &mdash; is the prevention of
nuclear war.
A rapidly growing body of opinion in this country believes that
neutral by helping to suggest agreements which could be accepted by
both East and West.
ONE FORCE AIM FOR SERVICES
400,000 REGULARS AND NO CALL-UP
By H. B. BOYNE,
Daily Telegraph Political Correspondent
THE next White Paper on defence, to be published in March,
is likely to contain a five-year plan for the three Services. Its aim
contemplated, the Navy, Army and Royal Air Force would become, for
There would be complete co-operation at all levels in training
and operations. This would apply also in the command structure and
numerous meetings with the Service Ministers.
and with other Ministers concerned with overseas aspects of defence
policy.
VOLUNTARY FORCES
Recruiting Confidence
Details of the scheme are now being worked out by the Chiefs of
Staff, a process that may take four or five months. The scheme will
be subject to Cabinet approval.
1957, in Mr. Sandys's time as Minister of Defence, is still correct.
This was to return to the tradition of all-Regular voluntary forces,
with the last National Serviceman out of uniform by the end of 1962.
The Minister regards the recent trend of recruiting figures as
encouraging. He is confident the aim can be achieved.
in some form cannot be entirely discounted, he does not agree that the
point has been reached where this need even be considered.
SERVICE CHIEFS
probably have to be for three years. It is thought this would be the
minimum necessary for the extended training modern arms require and to
There is no truth in suggestions that Mr. Watkinson is at odds
with the Service chiefs over the decision to dispense with National
Criticisms about Army manpower appear to have come mainly from
Mr. Watkinson has had the utmost support from the
C.I.G.S., Field-Marshal Sir Francis Festing, who believes
Richard Hull, who is to succeed Sir Francis, is equally convinced
Delay Due to Berlin
Sir Francis is to hand over to Sir Richard as from Nov. 1.
crisis.
Mr. Watkinson and his advisers felt the change would be unwise
important military operations.
For this reason Sir Francis stayed on, and sacrificed his leave.
Now that the Berlin situation seems more stable, it is felt he can
As a field-marshal, he remains on the Active List. He may be
asked to take another important post.
GAINS FOR Dr. VERWOERD'S PARTY
CAPE TOWN, Thursday.
AN electronic computer which has accurately forecast the
results of previous general elections put the new South African House
National Union members.
the disappearance of the Progressive party from the House.
being returned in their strongholds, like Bloemfontein and the
In the Cape, the veteran United Party politician, Mr. Harry
Salt River, by the United party candidate, Mr. H. M. Timoney.
electorate.
FRESH CHECK ON FALL-OUT ORDERED
THE Prime Minister disclosed in the Commons last night that
he had considered early in the Parliamentary recess whether to
mobilise reserves necessary to bring the British Army of the Rhine on
and to recall Parliament.
But there would be no hesitation in mobilising if a further
principle the imposed division of Germany. We must not be rattled
into surrender, but we must not &mdash; and I am not &mdash; be  afraid
STAND FIRM CALL
With a vigour and authority which delighted old Parliamentary
that appeasement over Berlin could only lead to war.
To stand firm, he declared, was not to invite war, but the surest
blackmail and survive.
PREMIER'S SPEECH
By T. F. LINDSAY
WESTMINSTER, Wednesday.
drift or be pushed into panic. We must not be rattled into surrender,
It was the end of a rather curious speech in which Mr.
a low, almost chatty monotone, and his voice never rose to any accent
He passed in rapid review the United Nations Secretariat; nuclear
tests; the canard about British interference with the United Nations
Irrevocable Division
irrevocable division of Germany.
of bases.
Mr. Macmillan explained that he had deliberately refrained
of the Rhine on to a fully active footing.
panic. He thought that the situation was rather more hopeful.
The Russians now realised its seriousness. The French doubts
temperature of the debate, which never at any time rose to fever
The early speakers in the debate each severely rated the speech
We started with the plaintive wailings of Mr. Healey,
Shadow Foreign Secretary, described by Mr. Godber, Minister of
State, Foreign Office, as pedantic and obscure on Berlin, damaging
and obscure on the Congo.
In turn, Mr. Godber was censured by Mr. Shinwell, former
Labour Defence Minister, for having read the House an ill-prepared
Free-for-All
which all the boys were welcome to take part, and only those who
really meant business removed their jackets.
Not many metaphorical braces were visible in the early stages of
to-night's debate. Mr. Healey had another tilt at the Prime
Minister's golf-course Press conference, which he described as a
A reference to the reunification of Germany brought a bark of
Trent S.). Then Mr. Healey launched out on his pet theme of
limitation of armaments in Europe.
production of atomic weapons in any part of Europe. Inspection and
Mr. Healey denounced the Government for using double standards.
new Russian tests, but they themselves had no condemnation for events
in Angola or Algeria.
But Mr. Healey had a partial and limited success. He rallied
Mr. Godber's performance merited all the mild scorn heaped on
position in view of the Russian tests, and said that the council's
findings would be published.
He was not so happy in his defence of the Government's failure to
an otherwise endearing creature whose articulation is limited, we are
told, to a series of heavy sighs.
M.P.s PROTEST AT EMBASSY
RUSSIAN TESTS
By Our Political Staff
Sir Lynn Ungoed-Thomas, M.P. for Leicester N.E., a
delivered a letter to Mr. Soldatov, the Russian Ambassador, last
night protesting against the Russian nuclear tests. It was signed by
60 Labour M.P.s, many of them Left-wing sympathisers.
A personal letter of protest against the tests from Canon
Collins, chairman of the Campaign for Nuclear Disarmament, addressed
Mass Lobbying
A POLITICAL CORRESPONDENT writes: Ban-the-bomb demonstrators
formed a queue stretching for more than 200 yards outside in Old
Mac and Lloyd whisper...
EARLY CURB ON THE PROFIT SHARKS
By MICHAEL STEVENSON
Sir Edward Boyle, Financial Secretary to the Treasury, said
tax.
These are people buying and selling shares within a short period,
chain of companies and put one property deal through each.
Mr. Harold Wilson, Shadow Chancellor, jumped up to offer the
Government an easy passage for such legislation.
Mr. Wilson asked.
Taxation Management Bill, if you like.
Profits of genuine investors in industry will not be affected,
but only quick in-and-out speculator deals.
yesterday to commit suicide at the TUC's invitation.
He was announcing his executive's rejection of the ultimatum to
the ETU.
hara-kiri.
The terms
The other TUC demands:
Sub-committees set up to strip secretary John Byrne of his powers
must disband in ten days.
BUT Mr. K SHOWS HIS TEETH
THE biggest naval show ever seen on the River Neva was staged
yesterday by Mr. Kruschev as Russia read his promises of a Communist
Among the 60 ships were rocket-carrying craft ranging in size
from torpedo-boats to cruisers, and submarines able to strike mighty
automatically, even to the preparations for launching their rockets.
Red NATO
Applauding on the river banks at Leningrad were thousands now
transport and medical treatment &mdash; all for a working week of 34 to 36
hours.
a truly inspiring and proud sight, said Moscow radio's commentator.
As Mac reveals his momentous decision to join the Six
By MICHAEL STEVENSON
provoked a violent personal attack by one &mdash; just one &mdash; of his
It is the most disastrous thing any Prime Minister has done
MPs SHOCKED
He concluded: The best service the Prime Minister can do
would be to resign.
The outburst shocked MPs of all parties.
Even close friends were signalling Mr. Fell to stop.
There were loud cries of shame from all parts of the
Conservative side.
A few minutes later, Mr. Fell got up and left the chamber.
He returned five minutes later to stand just inside the doorway
looking more composed.
hand at Mr. Fell.
Protests had been expected from Tory rebels. But Mr. Fell's
DISASTER
this Prime Minister is a national disaster, he said.
rallied support to the Prime Minister.
probably maximised his support.
There were no other attacks of such ferocity.
opposition, which will be aired in the debate tomorrow and on
As Mr. Macmillan made his announcement, the House was
crowded.
He said: No British Government could join the European
the needs of the Commonwealth countries, of our European Free Trade
Association partners and of British agriculture.
IT'S RIGHT
have come to the conclusion that it would be right for Britain to make
a formal application.. for negotiations with a view to joining the
Community.
At this point, Mr. Paul Williams (Cons., Sunderland) called
Mr. Williams is a close associate of Mr. Fell.
By MICHAEL STEVENSON
MR. MACMILLAN yesterday looked forward to a Commonwealth &mdash;
lose its identity in some future political merger.
The concept of a federal system, like the United States, was
Europe is too old, too diverse in tradition, language and
But a Commonwealth of Europe was much more in tune with their
Mr. Macmillan dealt with the main objection raised by Tory
Mr. Anthony Fell, who created a scene on this point on Monday,
Tribute
Mr. Macmillan said we could be more help to the Commonwealth
through the strength we would gain in the Common Market than by
He paid tribute to the development of the Common Market.
The Community (Common Market) has imparted an impetus and an
economic growth to The Six. Above all, it is an idea which has
gripped men's minds, he said.
towards Mr. Reginald Maudling.
These were negotiations in which the President of the Board of
Our industry, he said, would probably gain.
went on.
But the balance of advantage probably lay in the size of markets
which would be available &mdash; something comparable to the United States
or Russia.
Mr. Hugh Gaitskell argued that no final decision should be
told in Europe last weekend that we were looked upon as a liability.
authority, he retorted.
necessarily bound for federalism in Europe, he went on.
Tariffs
If we joined the Common Market, our food subsidies would
probably be replaced by a system of tariffs.
That will mean a rise in the cost of living.
BUDGETTE or no Budgette YOU are spending more as the
Note circulation soared for the sixth successive week &mdash; this time
by more than &pound;15,000,000 last week.
And that brought the figure to a record &pound;2,415,000,000.
Now look at the other side of all these coins.
...which shows that more than &pound;163,000,000 of the banks' money is
now frozen in the form of special deposits with the Bank of England.
K CRIES I SPY NAZIS
MR. KRUSCHEV raises the bogy of German militarism in his
And he repeats that the problem must be solved this year.
published in Moscow yesterday. They tell:
The U.S. &mdash; It is false to say the absence of a peace treaty
West Germany, with its militarists and revenge-seekers, is
Barbarously bombed
more than enough forces and arms to touch off a world war.
barbarously bombed London and other British cities.
WEST GERMANY &mdash; Russia would like to see a clear realization
that West Germany would not survive even a few hours of a third world
war.
West Berlin's reception centre DURING MONDAY NIGHT. And officials
expect the total to leap to 3,000 a day.
German disturbances on July 17, 1953.
And officials fear it may be too much for the city's refugee
camps. They will overflow and private houses will have to be used.
FOLLOW WINTER AT SANDOWN
By THE SCOUT
Scot &mdash; assuming that Fred Winter's mount would have made it a very
Team Spirit is 12lb. worse off this time, but on the other hand
is two years younger than his rival, and is likely to have made the
Also, there is little doubt that he has a brighter turn of
finishing speed than Dandy Scot, who only held on to second place in
the Rhymney Breweries 'Chase through his own indomitable courage and
Cheltenham last month, earlier beat Frenchman's Cove here &mdash; form that
at Kempton.
He is suggested as the best each-way long-shot and, together with
Dandy Scot, the danger to Team Spirit (2.35 nap).
similarly equipped today, he looks much too good for his Village
Hurdle rivals.
when sixth, running-on, behind Luminarch here last month.
Flame Gun, unbeaten here, seems well suited to giving away lumps
'Chase.
It is impossible to say whether Some Alibi would have won had
He should have too much speed, providing he stands up, for Hal's
(2.0), Tokoroa, and Bandalore meet in the Packington 'Chase.
Retour de Flamme allies his always bright turn of speed to
rivals.
Commandeer (3.30) is one of the best four-year-old hurdlers seen
out so far &mdash; though that is not saying much. He should have an easy
Bandalore from Tokoroa and Retour de Flamme (2.0 nap), may be
reversed in a unique replay this afternoon, when the trio clash at
hurdles, but in six encounters he never succeeded.
The Packington 'Chase will determine the bet, and if Syd Warren
hat-trick.
For on the two previous occasions he partnered this novice
Anyway it should be a great race. For Tokoroa's Hurst Park
running was undoubtedly an incorrect reflection on his true ability.
While Bandalore had no chance last time out to endorse his notable
first fencing effort.
Northern Mildmay hope, Springbok arrived at Sandown yesterday
Merganser also seems well treated, and Johnny Lehane is confident
of a bold bid by Miss Popsi Wopsi.
Me, I am going along with Dandy Scot (2.30 e.w.) on his
season was a fall two from home in a novices' 'chase.
Gerry Madden's luck finally changed yesterday &mdash; and what a
reception his fellow jockeys gave him &mdash; when King's last-fence fall
handed the Stanley 'Chase to Mandarin.
There is now no doubt that the winner's confidence was shaken by
his Chepstow fall, and he'll miss the National in favour of a Gold Cup
And, of course, 29-year-old Gerry, to whom Mme Kilian Hennessy
has remained so loyal, will continue to partner him henceforth.
Problem horse Mossreeba even defied Johnny Gilbert's skill in the
He struck the front after jumping the last but as Keith Piggott
says: He'll come and beat anything,  but as soon as he gets his
head in front up it goes &mdash; and he doesn't want to know.
by Beldon Hall's last-fence fall in the Mole Handicap.
League v Players &mdash; replay Wednesday
MINISTRY STAGE A LAST-CHANCE PEACE TALK
the Football League and the players' leaders together for a conference
to begin.
The conference could end in, at least, a postponement of the
strike notices. For the players' leaders are keen to tell the League:
We wish to negotiate on one of YOUR ideas &mdash; an eased form of
the retain and transfer system.
This new system was suggested by the Football League management
committee on December 29, accepted by the players, then rejected by
crisis.
FIRST-CLASS IDEA
With new, longer contracts, a manager could sign some of his
players for one year, some for two and some for three. At the end of
League president Joe Richards said last night at his Barnsley
He added: But I am not going to waste time. I am not budging
The players now believe that, if it is necessary, the final
League club, claiming they have no right to keep him out of League
football.
against the League's present contract than George Eastham, the
Newcastle star transferred to Arsenal after a long, bitter wrangle
Under the system suggested by the League management on December
If he refused to sign, the League would find him another club before
June 30.
to retain him, the club would have to pay him a minimum of &pound;15 a week
until he was transferred.
Mr. X will be happy with 10%
By ROBERT FINDLAY
THE mysterious Mr. X sat drinking coffee in the back room
Mr. X, accused by Football League secretary Alan Hardaker as
being the man behind the strike.
Jimmy Hill, chairman of the Professional Footballers' Association, one
take-over, I accused the fresh-faced, fortyish character who
offered me coffee in an Irish brogue. You want to dictate to the
Mr. X sighed helplessly. Not on your life. I'm only a
literary agent trying to earn 10 per cent to keep the wolf from the
door.
Bagenal Harvey is the name. His partner sat opposite him. His
name? Denis Compton.
Eleven years ago the enterprising Mr. Harvey began to
specialise in contributions by well-known sportsmen. He enrolled them
periodicals, books, broadcasts, and advertising.
sportsmen through the pitfalls of Fleet-street towards contracts based
helplessly. Ten per cent and the right to help sportsmen make
Mr. Harvey is extremely successful in his aims, though he
But to say I am behind the strike is so much nonsense,
And in any case I have enough to do minding my own business
On the walls of his office hung pictures of sporting celebrities
by his contributors.
is the only man an England cricket team ever invited to go on tour at
said half-jokingly before some of the team: I wish I was going with
necessary &pound;500 and invited Bagenal, through their captain, Freddie
Brown, to go with them.
gesture was what I call highly commended in any language.
CHEUNG from CHINA FACES WOLVES
OUT with the half-time lemon and in with the chop-suey... for
Football League. He is Blackpool's outside left against Wolves today.
And Aston Villa assistant manager Dick Taylor, who saw 19-year-old
testimonial: &mdash;
just can't understand why he hasn't been in the first team sooner.
Cheung called in at Blackpool last summer on his way to Rome,
liked Lancashire, forgot Rome, and signed professional for Blackpool
Ten reserve games, the last five at centre forward, and seven
goals &mdash; that's Cheung's record.
Oxford University... 5
Come rain, slime or mud &mdash; and all were present at Rodney Parade &mdash;
Newport always try to retain their famous and spectacular technique of
or rather stuck in the mud.
second penalty goal was in the same category, so that the margin of a
goal, two penalty goals and a try to a goal was, on the whole,
somewhat flattering.
Oxford put up a splendid fight and none more so than their
courageous captain, Willcox. His fielding, tackling and covering were
a complete justification of his selection for England against Ireland.
The centres, after one or two tentative thrusts early on when the
ground was not cut up, soon found they were reduced to kicking. This
probably justified in preferring to kick rather than to set his line
the ball with Wills waiting for the scoring pass.
Lewis soon kicked the first of his two penalty goals from the 25
while Willcox failed with a similar shot. But the Oxford full-back
redeemed himself immediately with a splendid tackle on Lewis.
Just after half-time an unfortunate mistake by Oxford caused the
first Newport try. Ware rushed in from the wing attempting to field a
high punt in the centre of the field, which Willcox had well covered.
They collided, neither secured the ball and, with the right-wing
unguarded, Wills was able to collect and score. Lewis converted with
Oxford Encouraged
this manner that they secured their only success. McPartlin and
The introduction of the white ball and floodlights gave Oxford
try. Griffiths caught him and Ware was only just held as he struggled
with three Newport men clinging to him towards the line.
However, Newport recovered their poise and a fine run by Jones
brought another try. Willcox stopped him but Wills was there to make
was caught off-side in front of the Oxford posts the Newport full-back
BARBARIANS DOUBT
R. E. G. Jeeps, England's scrum-half and captain, has had
Jeeps is playing against Ireland at Lansdowne Road to-morrow week
collapsed knee tendon and burst a blood vessel in the match against
against the South Africans at Cardiff. He will have a fitness test
to-day.
Since Davies has also been selected to play for Wales against
take any risks in turning out for the Barbarians.
Coventry's other England player, hooker Robinson, has been
selected for the game but may stand down.
H. J. Wyman, a senior from Bablake School, Coventry,
replaces Cheltenham freshman D. Protherough as hooker for
Gloucester last week.
NAVY'S WEAK COVERING LETS SWANSEA THROUGH
Swansea... 16 pts
SWANSEA were too strong for the Royal Navy on a muddy St.
covering allowed Swansea to score tries, but it was the greater
experience and vigour of Swansea, with five internationals, which
carried the day.
After their good display against Newport the Navy failed to
half they were never able to control the play.
Williams Outstanding
with Williams the outstanding forward on the field. Two new halves,
centre.
Swansea took the lead after 33min when Navy passing broke down
beating Sinclair and Cormack, to score just short of the dead-ball
line.
line-out and ran through to send Rodd over from 25 yards.
Early in the second half Swansea took the lead. E. Lewis went
good goal from far out.
the Navy line for another try. After 15 minutes the Navy again
Richmond athletic ground yesterday, was postponed because of the state
of the pitch. It has been provisionally arranged for next Thursday.
RAC, London, from Feb. 15-20.
Sporting Commentary
OPPONENTS of England on the hockey field this season will no
He is in hospital and there he will stay for the next three weeks to
After that prolonged rest will be necessary. Conroy is out for
the season and the selectors have a problem on their hands in shaping
the England attack, which will make the more senior members, such as
At that time Conroy was in Canada, where he had gone from
Melbourne following the Olympic Games. In his absence England put
into the field the most ill-assorted attack I can ever remember. In
five internationals, ten forwards were selected, the line never played
South Africa and Germany, beating Wales and Scotland and playing a
goalless draw with Ireland.
selectors at this moment, with Conroy injured and two other likely
candidates for the forward line, internationals N. M. Forster and
critics of Conroy who complained that he slowed up the attack.
What they meant, of course, was that Conroy did not belong to the
says that nobody else could place the ball so perfectly to create an
I am sure Smith is right. I am equally sure that more could and
should have been made of Conroy's remarkable gift of ball-control by
programme of coaching and training, which in spite of the drive and
enthusiasm of the former match secretary of the Hockey Association,
In this respect England, and the other home countries, too, lag
and in some cases professional coaches of Indian origin have been
national team coach in S. D. Dickins whose methods have made
Hounslow one of the most successful club sides in the country over the
last ten years. Unhappily, Dickins has not so far enjoyed the
financial and administrative backing that a coach must have if he is
Holland Match Preparation
There are, however, some signs that the sting of many defeats
suffered at the hands of Continental countries since the war is slowly
creating its own antidote. Plans are afoot, I gather, for a training
Holland in the autumn, a team which will do justice to a match marking
This is good news. England have not beaten Holland in the five
matches played since the war. It is time the tide was turned.
enough on the offending team. So far no one has produced an
acceptable alternative.
International Hockey Board, the body which makes the rules, that a
penalty shot at goal be substituted for the penalty bully.
This, it seems, would be a flick or push shot, not a hit, and the
should be taken.
judge, is setting out on Circuit on April 15 despite the pleas of his
And Sir Kenneth Diplock, who has ridden in it &mdash; and lost &mdash; as a
Q.C., will be taking part for the first time as a High Court
judge.
At their home in the Temple last night she told me: Circuit is
under his robes.
He will be racing against five barristers.
been appointed aide-de-camp to the Queen in place of Group Captain
H. E. Brufton, who is retiring from the R.A.F.
CHARMIAN SCOTT, 18-year-old niece of the Duchess of
Gloucester, returned to modelling yesterday for the first time since
discoloured eye &mdash; well-camouflaged by make-up &mdash; were the only visible
travelling overturned at Hyde Park Corner.
but fortunately they can't be seen by the public.
She was appearing in a fashion show put on by a Piccadilly firm
in a Park-lane hotel. Among those watching her were her mother,
sales-girl for the firm.
Georgina does not envy her sister's much photographed fame.
I'm honest with myself, she said with a smile. I know
sell the clothes she models.
SEPARATE
His wife left on the same day for winter sports in Southern
that.
is just one of those things.
Pioneering spirit is still there
her farm &mdash; a lone white woman &mdash; throughout the Mau Mau troubles.
I was frightened, of course &mdash; who wouldn't be? &mdash; but there was
Things are different now. We have been let down. And with all
these African politicians making trouble it might blow up into another
pioneering spirit. I find building a new home again rather
exciting. It's a challenge you know. And I like a challenge.
KATHARINE WORSLEY, the Duke of Kent's fianc&eacute;e, made
her first public appearance with the Queen in a theatre outing
Her deep red dress, I'm told by the women with an eye for these
She also discovered one of the drawbacks of royal protocol: she
between them.
Also in the party were Prince Philip and Princess
Alexandra.
The play at the Vaudeville Theatre? Appropriately The Bride
ONE of London's odder reunions took place last night.
security officer at Colditz Castle, the camp for important prisoners
of war, met up with some of his old boys.
Herr Eggers urbanely. I always admired his spirit.
officer at Colditz, for a drink in a Knightsbridge pub.
Herr Eggers has a sense of humour but has never, apparently, lost
abide by the rules.
Now Reid, he said, was one of my biggest headaches. When
with him.
The habit of Reid's which Eggers found most infuriating was when
Reid's performance.
fellow, said Eggers.
COOKING
PRETTY 24-year-old Vanessa Marsh, whose father, Mr.
heaths of Newmarket for the kitchens of the officers' club at
She lives in as a &pound;6 10s-a-week assistant cook, preparing
Martin Parsons, half-brother of Mr. Antony Armstrong-Jones,
FROM the juke box Elvis Presley throbbed Are You
opponent.
youth club last night.
The club has 80 members and two rules: no credit and no obscene
language. And since the duke is the landlord of the building (rent
1s. a year) he was the obvious choice as guest of honour.
unimpressed.
I am a bit old, he explained almost apologetically, for
for a few years. It is clear that the Princess and her husband are
settling down in London and for this purpose 1a, Kensington Palace
(above)
is well suited.
The house, in the south wing of Clock Court, is one of Sir
Christopher Wren's finest examples of domestic architecture. It was
couple far more privacy than they have at No. 10.
The money to be spent on Princess Margaret's new home is only a
fraction of a &pound;360,000 plan to give the Royal Family and their staffs
up-to-date accommodation.
Now young Mr. Clore heads for the top
own ability, has become Britain's best-known man of property, seems to
have passed some of his own brilliance on to his son.
At an age when most schoolboys are merely preparing for the
Lincoln College, Oxford.
A fairly remarkable achievement, but I am told that young Clore
boys include the Duke of Kent, the Shah of Persia, and the
Aga Khan) describe him as a very likeable lad.
A spokesman for the college says: He has been accepted as a
that his son will study philosophy, politics, and economics. After
Mr. Clore's marriage to his French-born wife Francine was
dissolved in 1957. Their two children Alan and his sister Vivien,
year.
Clore, who lives in Paris, is at the moment staying in London.
And his ex-wife tells me her visit is to shop and see her doctor and
NINE-YEAR-OLD Christina Onassis, daughter of Mr.
Aristotle Onassis and his ex-wife Mme. Tina Livanos, left
been visiting her mother, who is in hospital recovering from a ski-ing
accident.
At the airport they went aboard the aircraft an hour before the
WANTED: A STAR
MADAME LILY PAYLING, the Australian contralto who many times
packed the Royal Albert Hall before the war, is looking for a British
GOLF BARGAIN
IT is an object lesson in the concessions one has to make
still be too good to be given a game by his wife.
To his surprise he has discovered that although he plays tennis
leading couturier, has been chosen by Katharine Worsley to design
Said Cavanagh, 46 and for years the favourite designer of
Mr. Cavanagh has already met Miss Worsley at Kensington Palace
to talk over ideas.
As Tony and topper make an Ascot debut...
wandered across the green lawns of Ascot. The new &pound;1,000,000 stand
the wind had littered the paddock with leaves.
His Grace ordered the leaves to be removed and the sweepers came
out.
All did. The weather decided to co-operate and Ascot 1961
opened in all its glory.
The crazy costumes and ridiculous hats... The Royal Family
driving up the course... Antony Armstrong-Jones making his Ascot
meeting last year).
This year there are two sports at Ascot. There is the
horse-racing &mdash; and there is the one-upmanship in the boxes of the new
grandstand.
who have taken the boxes. They vie with each other to produce the
most impressive lunch.
This is more difficult than it may seem, for the Ascot caterers
Clore to the Maharanee of Baroda, from Lew Grade to Lord
Cornwallis.
spoke to) and strawberries and cream. Then there were wines to order.
Mrs. John Valentine arrived from Sunbury-on-Thames
She wasn't going to risk having the watered kind.
HYLTON'S WINE
Jack Hylton brought his own wine. A few doors down the
corridor someone had brought a lace tablecloth to replace the damask
ones provided.
crab &mdash; a present for his host. Everyone seems to have lobster,
a hamper, isn't it? And I didn't actually have another hamper.
Knowing something of the advantages of a good display, sales
each box.
Before anyone arrived in Charles Clore's box part of the flower
Lord Moynihan's box and swapped a cracked plate for a sound one
are picnicking, do you?
It was the happiest moment of Royal Ascot. The Queen's
Majesty's first Ascot success since 1959.
And the Royal Family, clearly delighted, went down to the
unsaddling enclosure.
gave her Ascot guests an evening out. They occupied the front two
Among the guests &mdash; that eligible bachelor Nicholas Eden,
to ask: Please tell me, someone, has this got a happy or a sad
Paul Tanfield
Fabiola regrets... but baby is still unofficial
IT is not altogether surprising that the Belgian royal family
Baudouin and his queen postponed next month's State visit to London.
It merely said: The queen's state of health and the care it
requires led King Baudouin and Queen Fabiola to express the wish that
NO NEWS
Of course, he said, but we cannot say so officially. We
official until an official announcement has been made.
telegram to King Baudouin. Taking its tone presumably from Brussels,
able to welcome your majesties to London in July.
In Belgium last night, Queen Fabiola's subjects were hoping that
they, too, might hear some good news about her health. Well, some
news, anyway...
SURVIVAL
Wilfred Noyce, mountaineer, writer and schoolmaster, who was
job as an assistant master at Charterhouse, the Surrey public school,
to concentrate on writing.
His book South Col described the successful assault on
His wife, Rosemary, told me that Heinemann have also asked
survivors of the Agadir earthquake in French Morocco last year &mdash; and
Nelson have commissioned him to edit an atlas of the world's mountain
Another book, on survival in concentration camps, may follow
Altogether, it looks as if the ex-schoolmaster will have no
difficulty in surviving himself.
Take your pick, says Stokowski
THAT former fire-eating conductor Leopold Stokowski is a
In fact, when I talked to him yesterday after his rehearsals for
Sunday's concert with the Philharmonia Orchestra, he told me of his
fierce as Toscanini in a rage &mdash; had his own starch-like ideas about
for themselves where they sit.
We try my way and then their way, said Stokowski. Then
they will vote on it.
shall just say O.K. &mdash; let's have the good concert.
I'm a martinetissimo!
London-born Stokowski, now 79, has a reputation for highly
like it.
is here on behalf of the New York State Racing Commission to
investigate the subtleties of this distinctly British occasion.
We have our stylish races in America, of course, she told
The Duke of Kent hires a honeymoon plane
COMPLETE WITH HOT AND COLD RUNNING MUSIC...
Rolls-Royce of the air, which he has chartered through Hughie
distributing firm, flew the Atlantic earlier this year.
Europe, the Middle East and Africa, during which it was flown by
The Duke and his new Duchess will travel in comfort. The
has seating for 12 &mdash; in cosily-padded swivel armchairs.
and hot drinks can be whipped up, a roomy wardrobe, and a handsome
of I'd Do Anything For You, Dear, Anything, and music from other
told me: The plane has a built-in stereo tape-recorder which can
play for the whole four hours it will take to fly to Majorca.
We are recording hits from the London shows on it. We
understand the Duke likes them.
This plane is purely a demonstration model, said Mr.
Willcox. We don't normally do charters. But we are naturally
honoured that the Duke should have chosen our plane and happy to
oblige him.
components, will be flown by an American, Captain Mike Guididas,
BITTER FIGHT
Prince William of Gloucester, apparently the only member of
He was off to Calais with a friend, Nicholas Tollemache, son
of Lord Tollemache, and a new car, a Sunbeam Rapier convertible.
But when the airport commandant, Bernard Collins, invited him
him down and went to fight for a ham sandwich and a half of bitter in
Afterwards, drinking his bitter, he explained that he would be
few days, he said. Then making for Greece via Yugoslavia.
takes us.
Today's the day for Bacall
today &mdash; providing some missing documents arrive in time from America.
TUDOR SURPRISE IN TREASURY OFFICE WORK
30FT. LONG WALL AND TURRET
Reconstruction work on the Treasury offices in Whitehall, which
surprised the Ministry of Works by the amount of Tudor brickwork it
has revealed.
window 20ft. high and 8ft. broad. This is part of the west wall
court. The north-west turret of the building, standing to a height of
The east front of the hall, abutting on to Whitehall, was
in 1847, but he is credited now with unsuspected forbearance in having
wall. This wall has now been freed from the plaster that has covered
it through the centuries. Today it stands to almost its full height,
with its original windows, of which one, on the ground floor, retains
tennis court, was known to have survived all rebuilding operations in
this part of Whitehall. But the stripping of its wall coverings has
now revealed most of the original window openings and, incidentally,
proved that some of the so-called Tudor windows incorporated in
The lower part of the gallery &mdash; it was known in former times as
Cockpit Passage by reason of its leading to the long vanished Tudor
August, 1962 &mdash; there will be incorporated in the new Treasury offices
part of the wall of the Tudor hall and one of its great windows at the
The end wall of the small tennis court overlooks Treasury Green,
through Treasury Passage they will see the wall of the small tennis
court and the exterior of Cockpit Passage.
The original estimate for the reconstruction of the Treasury
Cardiff Magistrates yesterday rejected an application that two
not handcuffed to one another.
The four men were charged jointly with breaking and entering
Lloyds Bank in Cardiff between January 14 and January 16 and stealing
Before the Court were: Colin David Baldwin, aged 26, of Braunton
Avenue, Llanrumney, Cardiff; Albert Augustus King, aged 32, of
Southmead, Bristol; Maurice Charles Harry, aged 32, of Northam Avenue,
Llanrumney, Cardiff; and James Bernard Powell, aged 32, of Penarth
Road, Cardiff.
COURT HEAVILY GUARDED
They were also jointly charged with stealing a car belonging to
Herbert Arthur Peel at Bristol between January 1 and January 2.
King and Baldwin were handcuffed together, with Harry on one side
handcuffs should be removed. This court is very heavily guarded and
Mr. K. Rees, for Baldwin, made a similar application.
the application, said that when arrested King had stated that he would
not be in custody for long. The two men ought to be held in restraint
Mr. Thomas said that entry to the strong room was gained by
blowing a hole through the 18in. thick side wall. More than &pound;3,000
The hearing was adjourned until today.
There has been a decrease of 53 per cent in the number of shops
in the City of London since 1939 and 18 per cent in the number of
an inquiry yesterday into an appeal heard by a Ministry of Housing and
Local Government inspector. Winmor Properties Ltd. appealed against
project for rebuilding Nos. 35, 37 and 39, Moorgate as offices.
Mr. S. M. Haines, architect for the developers, said the
small and spoil the building both architecturally and economically.
Mr. W. J. Glover, for the corporation, said it was the
policy of the Town Planning Committee that existing shops and
great tendency by developers to omit shops from their plans and the
corporation were having to take a firm stand in the matter.
TRING'S CAMPAIGN OVER PROPERTY FAILS
More than 100 local residents crowded into Church House here
Wimpole Street, London.
The final figure compares with a price of &pound;5,000 at which the
buildings were originally offered to the council by the Ministry of
which was refused by the council. The sale marks the apparent end of
a lengthy campaign for the hospital buildings to be returned to the
the hospital was taken over under the National Health Act in 1948 but
soon afterwards was closed as a hospital and has since been used
partly for storage purposes and also to accommodate a hospital board
were first offered to the council at the district valuer's figure of
&pound;5,000. It was stated that the Ministry had no power to return the
HEAVY ATTENDANCE
At the sale, conducted by Knight, Frank and Rutley, local
&pound;6,000, mainly by &pound;25 and &pound;50 advances, changing to &pound;100 advances
The buyer declined to give any indication of the future of the
buildings, which lie on a site of just over two acres and include a
five-bedroomed detached house, two small hospital blocks and various
conversion of the two ward blocks into residential accommodation, but
afterwards that the whole procedure which had culminated in the sale
had been grossly unjust. It was given to the town as a gift, he
said, and should have been returned.
PRESS COUNCIL MEMBER RESIGNS
FROM OUR CORRESPONDENT
BOLTON, Feb. 21
president of the Guild of British Newspaper Editors, has resigned from
disapproval of the handling of the Lady Chatterley's Lover case by
The Guardian, The Observer, and The Spectator. Mr.
this action.
of confidence, and that since he had made his views known without
matter in a letter to The Guardian.
In his letter of resignation Mr. Singleton wrote to Mr.
impression in the statement issued to the press that the opinion of
great honour to serve.
ETON RATE RELIEF
TOWN NOT AFFECTED, SAYS MR. BROOKE
The rating of public schools was a matter on which the Commons
rate public schools fully rather than give them 50 per cent relief.
Mr. Mitchison said that a large public school in an urban
district was anomalous. He hoped to raise the matter at a later
The amendment was withdrawn.
In a general discussion on clause 8, which concerns the reduction
and remission of rates payable by charitable and other organizations,
boarding schools &mdash; though there were exceptions &mdash; tended to be in the
country in rating areas which were not wealthy. Therefore in many
cases any effect of loss of rates due to the mandatory 50 per cent
derating would be made up by rate deficiency grant.
In the case of Eton, which had attracted some attention, though
could ascertain there would be no effect on the urban district council
rate, because any loss of rate through mandatory relief would be fully
made up by deficiency grant.
assisting such bodies as learned societies by rate relief because it
meant that local people would have to put their hands deeper into
their pockets. If any such bodies could establish their claim for
The clause was approved and the committee adjourned until
tomorrow.
CHARGES AGAINST LONDON VICAR
charges against Dr. W. Bryn Thomas, Vicar of the Church of the
Missing girl found in attic
ELEVEN-YEAR-OLD Nancy O'Brien, the girl who was missing from
yesterday.
ginger-haired man the police thought might be able to help in their
The windows of the attic were boarded over. Nancy was
Burneside.
enquiries.
A police description of Seddon said he was about 5ft. 10in.
to 6ft., long-legged, very slim, ginger-haired and wearing
tortoiseshell glasses.
No Reply
He was believed to be driving an old-type black Standard 14
saloon number ZH2014.
This was how little Nancy was found yesterday at the house in
Mrs. Winifred Hoyles, 28, who lives next door. She was playing with
her three-year-old daughter, Julie, at the time.
Mrs. Hoyles said later: I went next door and shouted, but I
I listened again, and it WAS someone screaming for
help...
Ladder
to get a ladder to put up to the attic window, and I went to call for
the police.
The police and the fire brigade arrived and they broke a
window and got into the house.
was this girl, wearing a green blazer and a dress. She was in her
Nancy said a man had left her in the attic on Thursday. She
told me:
Screaming
He locked the door and I couldn't get out. I've been
because of thick red-and-white-striped wallpaper which was plastered
over the boards nailed against the attic windows.
all in the room. The only light was from an electric bulb. So, for
THE Duke of Edinburgh made a twelve-minute appearance on
It was the Duke's first interview on British TV and he
It was concerned with the Commonwealth Technical Training Week
which opened yesterday.
Difficult
He added: By far the most difficult problem is this tremendous
for the job, regardless of age.
Britain, said the Duke, could not hope to compete in foreign
The Duke pointed out that of 550,000 school leavers aged from
There are all too many people who say: ~Well, we're not
going to bother to train anybody in our industry because they'll
During the training Week, factories all over the country will be
A MAN WHO DOES FOUR JOBS
A BARRISTER told a court yesterday about the man with four
This, Mr. Anthony McCowan told magistrates at Steyning,
Sussex, is the working life of fifty-six-year-old Richard Gilroy:
As a POULTRY FARMER he works till late afternoon.
business.
Five nights a week he works as a LATHE OPERATOR at a
because his poultry business had not been doing too well.
Gilroy, of Mill-hill, Shoreham, Sussex, admitted driving while
He was fined &pound;40, was disqualified from driving for a year, and
was ordered to pay &pound;12 costs.
BARONET'S WIFE NAMED
In a counter-petition Mr. Roberts asked the court to dissolve
What Labour is &pound;acking..
LABOUR'S cash problems were discussed last night by Mr. Len
Williams, the Party's National Agent and Deputy General Secretary.
The Party's National Executive, he said, was considering ways
of increasing Labour's income.
Mr. Williams was talking to more than 300 Young Socialists
&pound;250,000 income was contributed by the trades unions.
The average contribution from individual Party members, he
its job adequately.
Most of the Constituency Parties are always short of cash.
Many of them are in debt for the last election.
The trades unions, said Mr. Williams, had not only been the
main financial support of the Labour Party &mdash; they had been, through
Yorks: I lost my temper when he would not take his feed.
Wildridge, 37, of Rimswell-road, Hull, pleaded guilty to
assaulting and neglecting the baby, Michael, in a way likely to cause
The chairman of the magistrates, Mr. J. H. Tarbitten, told
As a result of striking the baby, he is blind for life. Any
circumstances, Michael was kept in hospital for a time after his
the baby to a doctor's surgery and said: He has had a bash in the
face.
saw the child. She thought he was dying.
that one leg had been broken but had healed.
Temper
Wildridge, who is unemployed, told the magistrates: I was
preparing a meal for my sick wife and the children were coming home
from school.
settee.
Gardener accused
ANTHONY Reginald Hitchcock, 29, was remanded in custody at
Clarence Neale, 35, his partner in a jobbing gardening business run
charge was read. The court was told that he had made a statement to
A WIFE led a perfectly blameless life... until she was
ensnared in the hire-purchase network, a court was told
possession for small down payments.
and sold hire-purchase goods so as to keep up the payments on them
He went on: The pace got hotter, and the whole nightmare of
Mrs. Hawkins mother of four children, was gaoled for fifteen
months
THERE were more strikes &mdash; and more people on strike &mdash; last year
There were more strikes in coal mining in 1960 than in any other
industry &mdash; 1,666 stoppages, involving 171,000 men.
Get cracking, Britain, says a union chief
LACK of leadership, second-rate men in top jobs, and a
Gunter, MP.
He was making his presidential speech at the annual conference
of the Transport Salaried Staffs' Association at Folkestone, Kent.
Leadership
insisted that the nation's greatest need was dynamic, adventurous
leadership.
search their souls and look ahead.
the Glasgow tug Ocean Salvor. There was no one on board when she went
Salvage vessels were being used in an attempt to beach the
It is now estimated that 212 people lost their lives, but it will
probably never be known how many Indians, Pakistanis and Arabs were
travelling as deck passengers.
Among those still missing are 30 of the crew, a few Europeans,
and an American couple.
All known survivors have been landed at Dubai or Bahrein. There
is little hope of finding any more.
Indications are that an explosion took place in a boiler space.
&pound;785,000 insurance
caught fire. She was owned by the British India Steam Navigation
Three British frigates helped in the two-day battle to get the
proportion of this amount was taken by the owners, and was therefore
was placed at Lloyds.
The Ministry of Transport will fly out a senior engineer and
surveyor today to make a preliminary investigation into the ship's
loss. A decision whether to hold a public inquiry in London will be
taken after they report.
TWO THOUSAND workers at the American-owned Burroughs
yesterday when their convener was suspended along with two other shop
stewards, the convener, Mr. Callaghan, was meeting the management
operate the firm's bonus system rejected by the workers.
On Friday the men had decided to work to rule unless the firm
reconsidered their claim for roughly &pound;1 a week more. They claim the
Skilled workers average about &pound;14 to &pound;15 a week.
Semi-skilled about &pound;11 to &pound;12. Unskilled start at &pound;9 5s.
A mass meeting will be held outside the strike-picketed factory
BECAUSE he thinks an example should be made of teenage
Tory Mr. Firth, who is 39, said yesterday in letters to the
on the cinema ban:
The aspect of this which appals me is that you took your
lay-abouts were when not engaged in creating trouble.
What is the remedy? Is it to spend more money on youth which
we parents eventually have to pay? I do not think so. I think we
must teach by example...
once had.
A QUARTER of Britain's food is produced by small farmers,
including hill farmers who are little more than peasants, sweating
Landowners' Association was told yesterday.
1959 Fison Award winner, said there were 166,000 farms of under 20
acres.
If Britain could reach a stage at which the minimum was 35 to 40
Common Market which no country in Europe could match.
BANISH KILLER DUST CALL BY WELSH PITS
Daily Worker Reporter
the South Wales area of the National Union of Mineworkers.
not a safe standard, is urged by safety officer Linden James, writing
extraordinary measures implemented that are necessary to rid mining of
dust disease, says Mr. James.
Such measures will cost money and, as there is some reluctance
346 in a year
died from dust in 1959 alone.
disease.
In some coalfields dust was merely a nuisance. In South Wales it
was a matter of life or death.
As the achievement of these standards was now the ultimate aim,
the standard has been reduced from an incentive to suppress dust to
The existing standard was no longer effective, and should
James.
Urging a campaign for improved conditions, he asks the miners to
equipment provided.
Dust kills; if we make dust unnecessarily, we are killers,
he warns.
beer, insurance, gas light and coke, match, banking and estate company
chief to be Governor-General of Australia.
died in February.
confusion, with the Melbourne Herald announcing it first and
congratulating Mr. Menzies, the Australian Prime Minister, on his
acceptable choice.
A little later yesterday Mr. Menzies said he was delighted
Chief among the new Governor-General's business connections has
He claims descent from the Elizabethan poet and hero Sir Philip
Sidney. Early in the 19th century one of his ancestors named Shelley
came into the Sidney property and had the name added by Royal Licence.
Grenadier Guards, winning the V.C. at Anzio.
Secretary of State for Air.
He followed the 3rd Baron \de \l'Isle, who married a daughter of
Australian Labour Party leader Arthur Calwell said yesterday:
There are many Australian citizens who will fill the office as well
The Australian Labour Party's attitude was that the
Daily Worker Reporter
concern, Bents' Breweries.
of London Police and Liverpool C.I.D. were examining the whole
Two C.I.D. officers saw him and asked him about the
The council of the Stock Exchange decided yesterday to allow the
resumption of dealings in shares of the brewery.
Mr. Halton said that he was very pleased dealings had been
yesterday shares fell from the 47s 6d they reached last week.
holding the conference, he told delegates to the Council for
Major issues are expected to be the situations in West Irian, the
17 years in a home, she wins release
THE National Council for Civil Liberties has won the first
case it has taken up before the newly established Mental Health Review
Tribunals.
took up her case in 1957.
their detention under the new Act.
An officer of the council said it had hundreds of other cases on
years, the Registrar-General forecasts. But, if present trends
continue, they are more likely to suffer a fatal accident in the home.
The surplus of women over men in England and Wales &mdash;
By then, the Registrar-General says in his return for the quarter
Marriage rate
as in 1959.
of babies under a week old was 32 per 1,000 &mdash; the lowest recorded.
Although the total of fatal accidents in the December quarter &mdash;
Of these 298 were from coal-gas poisoning.
Only 19 people died from polio in the first nine months of 1960,
Coventry to greet bomb march today
TRADE union officials, shop stewards, trades council
marchers when they arrive here after completing their 14-mile stint
Appealing to workers here to turn out to welcome the marchers,
Workers have been asked by officials and stewards of half a dozen
Rally in the Precinct at lunch-time to welcome the marchers and
A COLOURFUL exhibition commemorating the centenary of a
On April 11, 1861, the seven young men, poets, painters, an
undertaking, which marked a new epoch in British cultural life.
University was formed last night by 40 men and women &mdash; porters,
gardeners, kitchen staff, and maintenance workers.
Mr. A. Butterworth, assistant national officer of the
National Union of Public Employees, who advised them on how to form
the new branch, said afterwards that there were more than 1,000 men
and women working in Cambridge colleges who had no agreements on pay
The union will strive to bring them all into membership and
seek for them rights equal to those of similar workers in local
NO CONTRIBUTION
The Ministry of Housing and Local Government has rejected a
The South Eastern Electricity Board yesterday apologised to
consumers in Leighton Buzzard, Beds., because a technical error
caused their electrical machinery to operate backward.
a half hour blackout by temporarily linking secondary lines was
abortive.
was restored and the bench motors were started. Sewing machines
worked backwards and the vacuum pressing plant instead of holding
Other factories sent workers home because there was no power. An
electricity board spokesman said yesterday: A letter of apology and
happen again.
Fined in drink case
Judge David Eyfion Evans, a county court judge in the mid-Wales
for 12 months yesterday for driving while under the influence of
drink.
Judge Evans, who appeared at Builth Wells, was ordered to pay
His address was given as Plasgwyn, Aberedw, in Builth Wells. He
Judge Evans's car collided with a stationary car at a cross-road at
Howey. The other car was driven by a Mr. Elwyn Jones, who saw Judge
Evans in the driving seat of his car looking dazed.
what he thought he was doing. The two cars were freed, and the judge
reversed away. Mr. Jones again tried to speak to him, but without
success.
Jones said. Both Mr. Jones and his son, who was with him, had said
that the judge drove erratically. His speed varied from about 30 to
Mr. Jones supported him to stop him from falling.
Eventually the judge agreed to allow Mr. Jones to drive him
said that he presided over a meeting of the mid-Wales and
Herefordshire branch of the Magistrates' Association at Llandrindod
Wells which was attended by Judge Evans. He had what appeared to be
a bronchial cold.
1958. His condition had resulted in outbursts of anger and he had
result of alcoholic drinking.
the morning of September 22, Judge Evans took three bottles of light
meeting at Llandrindod Wells. He tried to appear normal, although he
produce symptoms of drunkenness, make him unsteady in his movements
and in his eyes while his speech might be thick. It could also result
Mr. Alun T. Davies, defending, said that the judge's driving
advanced motorists. There was no question of him driving again until
treatment. The gang escaped in a car, which was found abandoned
Costs for Lord Mayor
BYELECTION CASE DISMISSED
Turner) yesterday dismissed a summons against the Lord Mayor of
Union Movement's candidate. Mr Bancroft Turner awarded 20 guineas
costs against Mr Hesketh as a contribution to the defence costs.
Alderman Biggs, as returning officer, had the right to appoint a
deputy &mdash; in this case the town clerk &mdash; who, in turn, was authorised to
appoint deputies.
Mr Moseley agreed with Mr Hinchliffe that Mr Hesketh had
received an invitation from the Lord Mayor for all the candidates to
27.
Was your reason for not accepting the invitation to appear on Friday
any way? &mdash; Yes, that was one reason.
matter of courtesy, for the Lord Mayor, to extend an invitation to all
the parliamentary candidates to attend at the town hall at a certain
time with their nomination papers. It was done to prevent the
returning officer or the acting returning officer from being
incarcerated in a certain building from 10 a.m. to 3 p.m. on
Mr Moseley said that the election officer (Mr Norman \de
Gruchy) told him at the town hall on October 25 that he was no more
authorised to accept nomination papers from Mr Hesketh than a
In evidence Mr \de Gruchy said he did not recall saying he was
not authorised to accept the nomination papers.
In dismissing the summons, Mr Bancroft Turner said Mr Hesketh
consideration, however, was that if a member of the public wished to
times, his position should be carefully safeguarded.
Minister rejects corporation's high street plan
Housing and Local Government, Dr Charles Hill.
In a letter to the town clerk published yesterday, he says that
would be a hindrance to traffic and a danger to pedestrians.
centre, an office block area, a bus station, car parks and an inner
A public inquiry held last year recommended that the scheme should
be rejected. The Minister, however, has said that he is prepared to
amend it to include all but the new high street and shopping area.
A spokesman for the corporation said last night: We have had
Mr Hannen Swaffer, aged 82, the journalist, is to enter
SOVIET MINISTER ON TESTS
No radiation danger
Council of Ministers, arrived in London yesterday from Moscow at the
head of a seven-man Soviet delegation of scientific and industrial
experts. He said that it was considered that the level of
radioactivity resulting from Russian nuclear tests is not dangerous.
Russia was not proposing to supply dried milk to children as a result
Technology until last year, was asked what benefit the recent tests
brought to Soviet scientific research. He replied: I personally am
not a specialist in nuclear weapons and I cannot add anything to the
official statements of the Soviet Government.
A former Bristol Rovers footballer, Mr John David Hamilton,
fire in their three-room bungalow at Hall Lane, Olveston,
Firemen called by a neighbour discovered the bodies buried under
was still clutching her. Another neighbour, Mr Edward Greaves, and
his son, who tried to get inside, were beaten back by the heat and
smoke. By the time the fire brigade arrived, he said, the bungalow
was a roaring mass of flames.
By our own Reporter
will increase. Informed opinion, the council says, puts the
increase at 10 or 15 per cent.
The council, in a memorandum to the Robbins Committee on Higher
Two new organisations are envisaged. One of these might keep
questions of technical education and training for Commonwealth
students under constant review. It should concern itself with
EUROPEAN AIR FARES MAY BE RAISED
By Our Air Correspondent
morning.
The meeting has been called to discuss the need for the
European airlines who have become alarmed at continually rising costs,
in particular the U.K. Ministry of Aviation's decision to raise
landing fees at its airports by about one-third from April 1.
All the European carriers, including British European Airways,
any proposal to raise fares, especially at such short notice. The
airline has booked many hundreds of thousands of passengers on the
entire philosophy of getting fares down and keeping them down.
emergency session of the I.A.T.A. are several of the smaller
European carriers, who have in the past been strong opponents of
fares-cutting airlines, such as B.E.A.
Ending Fares Freeze
The problem of these smaller airlines is not difficult to
and even bitter argument, at the I.A.T.A. traffic conference in
Honolulu in the Autumn of 1959, to become effective from April 1,
1960.
European reductions were also agreed, to become effective from April
of two years, agreeing that there would be no further traffic
conference until the autumn of 1962, when fares would be fixed for the
Effect on Costs
The effect of this would have been to keep European air fares
at their existing levels right up to the spring of 1963, in the face
of rising costs and steadily expanding capacity as more and more jets
joined the airlines' fleets.
beyond Europe. The existing fees are about &pound;44 basic and &pound;84 full.
the full rate from about &pound;30 to &pound;41.
The effect will be to put up B.E.A.'s landing fees for
U.K. domestic flights alone by &pound;440,000 in a full year, and by
probably as much again on its landing fees for international flights.
B.E.A. has already been forced to counter this by raising
cancelling out part of the cuts in those fares it proposed to make
from that date.
FOREIGN AIRLINES
Openly Critical
Every foreign airline flying to the U.K. is in the same
it is understood that the Ministry's decision will be cited by many at
the Paris meeting as one of the principal reasons why air fares in
fees become effective.
In order to protect its bookings position &mdash; and its avowed
autumn. Whatever the outcome, it is already clear that the Paris
meeting will be difficult, and perhaps even stormy.
&pound;12m. Order for Boiler Consortium
By Our Industrial Correspondent
The first boiler contract for the recently formed consortium of
John Brown Land Boilers and Foster Wheeler was announced yesterday by
Shared Contracts
350,000 kilowatt boilers, at a cost of over &pound;12m., to the Tilbury B
There is considerable over-capacity in the boiler industry, and
new West Burton power station in Nottinghamshire was shared between
Simon-Carves and International Combustion, and, as reported last week,
and Company.
The new Tilbury contract will represent a much-needed addition of
new work for the two companies concerned. Lord Aberconway, chairman
a British generating authority for more than four years.
Service Dates
The first two turbo-alternators are due for commissioning in
1965 and the remaining two in 1966. The generators, as reported
CHAIN OF SHOE SHOPS FOR CO-OPERATIVES
From Our Own Correspondent
MANCHESTER, March 22.
electrical goods.
Fifty-six Co-operative retail societies have already indicated
their readiness to join the English and Scottish Wholesale Societies
specialist shops.
Some of the largest retail societies are among those joining.
Suburban, Birmingham, Liverpool and Plymouth, Newcastle-on-Tyne and
the Co-operative Retail Service, a big amalgamation of societies.
plans to open. This will give the chain an initial capital of over
&pound;500,000 &mdash; half provided by the retail societies and half by the
C.W.S. and S.C.W.S. The shops will not stock only
Existing Co-operative shoe shops will not be affected. We
trading committee and one of four directors nominated by the wholesale
to-day: Behind the new organisation will be the vast financial and
It is not yet known how many shops the new chain is likely to
From Our Own Correspondent
PARIS, March 22.
Reductions apply specifically to the Six countries of the
imports from outside. It is understood, however, that British and
The full details of the reductions will not be known until the
decree appears in the official journal to-morrow or even a day after.
It was stated that the decision was taken in anticipation of
the 10 per cent. reduction within the Common Market which takes
place automatically at the end of the year. It was indicated at the
One of the immediate results will be to nullify the effects of
in the French market. It is not quite clear exactly how the
prolonged discussion between Ministries as to whether the cuts should
apply uniformly across the board or should vary with different
products. It is, however, reported that the tariff on textiles and
per cent.
were designed to check the upward trend in prices. This is one more
indication of the French Government's determination to sweep away
DR. HELLER SEES SIGNS OF U.S. RECOVERY
economic adviser, Dr. Walter Heller.
Dr. Heller said that with signs pointing to a bottoming-out of
the recession the odds are not very strongly in favour of a
Aid for Workless
anti-recession Bills to the White House for signature. The Bill,
who have exhausted their benefits, followed on the heels of the Feed
law.
come up for consideration. The chances of some of the latter may
said to-day, might be relatively early. But he emphasised that only a
relatively slow return to full employment could be expected.
which comes up for House debate this week.
with the flood of proposals that has poured from the White House on a
scale only matched under President Roosevelt.
AN IRREGULAR TURN IN EQUITIES
GRATTAN WAREHOUSES' PROFITS UP 12%
Industrial equities developed an irregular turn yesterday.
failed to bring out much stock. Price movements were finally mixed
Volume was substantial again and the undertone still firm.
GEORGE McCARTHY In The City
Palmerston House, E.C.2.
Ordinary shares of Neville Developments. And thereby hangs a tale &mdash;
Neville Developments is a Birmingham company run by shrewd
chartered accountants. It has a number of operating subsidiaries, but
its main function is that of an issuing house specialising in
shares are among the cheapest ever brought to market.
50s. Earlier this year they were worth more than &pound;3 each.
Ordinary share and three sixpenny Deferred Ordinary shares. The
valuable later.
BEER WEDDING
the brewers of Newark, Notts.
Already this year John Smith's has bought up Yates' Castle
Brewery.
at around 22s. So the take-over terms should be interesting.
the Stock Exchange.
Business was small, but some of the gains were worth having.
while Penguins rose 10 1/2d. to 20s. 4 1/2d.
In oils, Burmah, which announces a three-million-dollar share
4,500,000-dollar option on more shares, rose 1s. to 34s. 1 1/2d.
WHERE MONEY GOES
Largest absorber of capital is the electricity industry, followed
by the British Transport Commission and the Post Office.
who spend it chiefly on housing and education.
RISING VALUES
THE &pound;1 Ordinary shares of Sopers of Harrow, Middx, the
4,135.
Boom time &mdash; and Bank rate may be clipped
they were backing their fancy with hard cash, and shares enjoyed their
Chemicals 2s., Beechams 1s. 9d., Typhoo Tea 2s.
while Prudential A rose &pound;1 to &pound;24 18s. 9d.
Courage and Barclay frothed up 1s. 6d. and Bents Brewery rose
2s. There was less excitement in the gilt-edged market. But gains
of up to 6s. 3d. were recorded.
EXPANSION
SIR CLAVERING FISON'S report should be in the hands of his
shareholders today. But it is already out of date.
He reports that the capital projects approved total &pound;13,500,000,
year.
Although group sales of this great fertiliser and chemical
down by &pound;900,000 to &pound;3,607,000. Even so it was the second highest
BOOMING BUTLIN
paying guests. This year the figure should be larger still, because a
Last June these lucky owners, having had a dividend for the year
capital bonus.
He also revealed that the full figures for this year will show an
half-yearly dividend is small only because the Chancellor has called
Stedeford, master of mighty Tube Investments.
He reports a jump in profits of &pound;3million to a record
profits of acquired Raleigh Industries, but we already know that these
declined last year.
In addition, the figures now out reveal that the earnings of a
So the group profits make pleasant reading to shareholders.
last year.
5s. to 67s. 6d. No wonder.
Lennox Boyd &mdash; who in his best front-bench manner yesterday launched a
scale.
are committed to the struggle for the new drinking market.
combined assets of over &pound;200million.
they will be right if enough of the drinking classes change their
taste.
DIVIDEND SHOCK
9d. But they recovered later to 6s. 7 1/2d., a fall of 10
MORE DOWN
Wiggins Teape, papermakers, tumbled 2s. 3d. to 50s. 9d.
Full details of the merger lowered both Rank Organisation and
Gaumont British by a shilling.
HOLDING THE LINE
DIRECTORS of Ault and Wiborg, the makers of printers' inks,
have continuing good news for their shareholders.
Half year's profit to September 30 last is &pound;14,000 higher at
equivalent of 6 1/2 p.c. paid last year before the hand-out of a
100 p.c. capital bonus.
p.c.
A final dividend of 10 p.c. brings the total distribution up
to 17 1/2 p.c. compared with 20 p.c. a year ago. Reason for
WAGON TAKE-OVER
DIRECTORS of Winget, the Kent engineers, and the Gloucester
merger.
Winget will offer the following share-exchange terms to holders
nominal of Convertible loan stock, for every nine Gloucester shares.
Last month Sir William Morgan, chairman of Gloucester Wagon, said
The merger should alter things.
HOME SEEKERS FACING BAD WINTER
The authority is the Building Societies Gazette. And I
The facts are, as the Gazette points out, that when the banks
and insurance companies are not lending money all home buyers turn to
like enough money to meet the huge demand. And building society
managers are not keen to lend large sums on expensive houses.
Some houses, it is true, might now fall in price, particularly
has been abandoned.
But the societies don't want to lend money on these old houses.
So in that case, too, the young home-builders will be frustrated.
For these houses, and some others, the winter could be a bargain
many young home-makers are in that position?
So young lovers move into a queue that goes on lengthening.
Says the Gazette: We wish them joy as they trudge from
society to society. We wish that Mr. Selwyn Lloyd could go with
them to listen to their interviews with building society branch
managers. Or perhaps they would prefer more cheerful company.
Perhaps they could have the cheerful company of Mr. Lloyd's new
brought about this remarkable situation. The tragedy is that he's
proud of it.
profit.
Cortaulds' sales for the half-year to September 30 were
&pound;3,600,000 higher at &pound;83,451,000 but profit in the six months
declined by nearly &pound;2 million to &pound;7,586,000.
And there is a small but severe shock for shareholders. Their
interim dividend is cut from 10d. to 9d. &mdash; that is, from 4 1-6
Final dividend last year was 5 5-6 p.c. to make 10 p.c.
which must eventually shame the politicians into following suit, the
Until 1940 it was an observable fact that there were composers
by their neighbours, and this was explained by the difference in
It is not so very long ago that Brahms met with bored
marvelled at their own particular appreciation of Sibelius, Delius or
Vaughan Williams.
appreciation of any music. What were formerly regarded as limitations
rather as flaws in the composers concerned, and the importance of
current in Britain and Germany when he was placed beside Bach and
Beethoven, but enormously higher than that which once virtually
dismissed him from French and Italian programmes. Bruckner is
gradually becoming known and appreciated outside the Germanic
countries in exactly the same way, not as the equal (let alone the
superior, as some enthusiasts have suggested) of Beethoven but as a
great and unique figure in the history of the symphony.
individuals (Casella, for instance, was an improbable champion) than
to national groups. The uneven value of his symphonies becomes
clearer as they are more performed, but at least three of them are now
as a minor master in the field of piano and chamber music, and
individual works have found their place in the repertory here.
The position of the great Anglo-Saxon favourites, on the other
incomprehension. This lack of critical discrimination, which can be
observed in our attitude towards performers as well as composers, is
centuries to sustain any strong national musical tradition of our own.
Handel, Mendelssohn and Gounod were all in their turn
astonished &mdash; and, being human, delighted &mdash; by the adoration that their
works received in this country. In our own day Delius was quite aware
that his music was enjoying a vogue that carried no guarantee of
America as the greatest living composer.
belittling, or at best damning with faint praise, the music of
these three composers. But any praise must seem faint after the
extravagant paeans that it has prompted in the past; and is it
belittling a composer who has been too easily proclaimed a giant to
attempt a more objective estimate? The violent opposition that these
composers have certainly aroused in some quarters does not spring from
an objective valuation of their music so much as from the fact that
the revolutionary works of Stravinsky, Schoenberg and Bartok.
Now that we have begun to become familiar with these, we can also
begin to discriminate in our judgments of Delius, Sibelius and Vaughan
contemporaries.
Gaining from the Right Setting
than the first view of the three massive towers of Bruges, giant
figures dominating a rather desolate landscape, as one approaches the
town across the flat coastal plain.
Bruges itself, with its belfry old and brown, still
preserves many signs of its mediaeval prosperity and it provides an
incomparable setting for the S&eacute;minaire Europ&eacute;en de Musique
Ancienne.
of Pro Musica Antiqua, to organise at the College of Europe in
Every year since 1957 students from all over the Continent,
The complete course takes three of these sessions, so that this year
was the second year of the second course.
three students from England and one, a lutenist, from distant Finland.
Each day they attended lectures and made music informally together.
By a happy chance, the course coincides every second year with
the Biennale Internationale de Po&eacute;sie, a gathering of poets
This they did last weekend, offering to a large international
music and works of the Burgundian school. Almost every student took
part, either playing or singing, sometimes putting aside an instrument
only a few weeks, that many of them had little previous knowledge of
early music and that some were not professional musicians, one could
often seems remote and inaccessible.
enjoyment in old French, as though they had been preparing the piece
for months instead of weeks. Much of the music performed was of great
contrapuntal complexity and profound religious feeling; that they were
PEOPLE quite often write to ask me to choose plays for
them, and it is quite natural that they should. Here I am at their
service, and I do my best to comply. But I sometimes wonder if they
realise how difficult the task is. They are asking me to look at
All valid criticism is informed personal opinion. That is a
truism which will be questioned hardly anywhere, except in some
man in the street is thought to have a mystic significance.
My old friend and colleague, Campbell Dixon, used to tell of a
with an air of shocked incredulity that what he offered his public was
his own private and unsupported opinions. But surely, he said to
her, that's what you do, isn't it?
Certainly not.
I stand in the foyer and listen to what people are saying.
beliefs, my own experience. Nobody is likely, or even encouraged, to
follows that a good number of the people who write to me about the
of answer to anyone who thinks suitability all that important.
Common Sense
It is, to me, a matter of plain common sense. At any given
moment there are sure to be plays running in London to which the label
is not necessary, because everybody knows which these plays are, or
can easily find out; and nobody in his senses would dream of taking a
child or an innocent maiden aunt (should such exist) to one of them.
Outside this category there are many plays of a mild degree of
unsuitability; and to these I personally should not hesitate to take
When I was a young schoolboy I used to sneak off to the local
consulted, might not have approved; and they never did me a mite of
harm. Later, when I myself was a parent, I exercised only the
harm either. How, then, can I help other people to impose a ban in
which I do not believe?
Anyway, once you begin to look at the problem, there is almost
nothing you can take a child to. Shakespeare is impossible, of
Peter Pan? &mdash; very little sex there. True, but there are other
horrors. I remember sitting behind a small boy who bounced in his
chair with glee at the opening scene &mdash; the dog-nurse, the flying
rest of the act gazing longingly over my right shoulder at the
to recommend a play suitable for a party of 30 people (sex, age
Lady or The Mouse-Trap?
To my mind, people do much better picking their own
entertainments, even at random. I know of a Women's Institute which,
on the strength of having enjoyed Sandy Wilson's pure Boy Friend,
Advise and condense
tried to explain the difference between the Senate and the House of
It was like a symbolical explanation of why so many outsiders
fail to understand American politics and why &mdash; to them &mdash; the
tortuous for some foreign readers. The decision then to make a
massive Hollywood production of Mr Drury's novel is like a challenge
to succeed where so many others have failed, for to be a success &mdash;
the reality of Washington and yet be simple enough for international
Washington, our old friends Reality and Illusion were busy providing
head-on at one party when an actor playing a senator learnt that the
stranger he was chatting with was a real senator. The Hollywood
senator had a noble looking image &mdash; as public relations prose
sometimes puts it &mdash; and the gracious manners of an old plantation
patriarch, whereas the real senator had the kind of untypical and
millionaire and would not get heroic film billing anywhere outside a
home movie. The senator looked too right, almost as the outsider
unexpectedness about him, as if he could not possibly be cast as
anyone but himself.
Much of the gap between Illusion and Reality is caused by the
their characters in a matter of minutes. The real test of the film in
to keep up with the clock.
selection of a controversial Secretary of State and the conflict
between the White House and much of the Senate over it &mdash; and threw in
a few skeletons in the senatorial cupboards to show off when the
former political reporter in Washington for the New York Times,
tone to be fair even to extremists like the arch conservative from the
South, Seab Cooley. Charles Laughton, who still has a Yorkshire ring
to his voice, described his preparation for playing Cooley as an
senators from the South. In the only scene I saw him play, he made
his point with lightning professional speed and also managed a
surface. This was clearly how to make the most of the time and how
the speed-up will depend very much on Mr Preminger, and if he loses
Washington seeming a melodramatic circus rather than the complex
meeting-place of all the States, the focus of a nation's myriad
viewpoints. Mr Preminger's deep Austrian roots may help him there
for although now an American citizen, he may see Washington with both
overglossing. His record suggests he is a believer in best-sellers as
a basis for a film, and a man who knows him suggests this is because
he usually becomes excited about one of the characters. This is
probably the former actor coming out in him, and certainly on the set
he often gives the impression of a caged actor on the wrong side of
the camera yearning to give a performance himself. This may explain
why sometimes his films let personality do the work of imagination and
men like Ayres, Tone, Fonda, Pidgeon, not to mention Laughton &mdash; who
Washington. How refreshing then it was for Reality to assert itself
in the person of a little tailor. One of Mr Preminger's assistants
and assumed he &mdash; or rather Mr Preminger &mdash; would naturally be given
credit. The Preminger name worked no miracles with the little man (he
politicians (even President Kennedy) or any of the film stars (even
FRANCO ZEFFIRELLI
by Gareth Lloyd Evans
FRANCO ZEFFIRELLI, whose explosive production of Romeo
and Juliet shook the Old Vic out of its Shakespearean sloth, is now
at Stratford on Avon setting the fuses for Othello, which opens
next week. Yet, in spite of what we saw at the Old Vic, our
expectations for Othello, and his very name (like a hissing
Florentine back-street conspiracy) he could be mistaken for a tired
acquaintance easily, and smokes Salems like a furnace.
From his Romeo and Juliet one might expect a vivid staccato
surprise is his imaginative, eloquent feel for historical
process, and his sense of Western civilisation as an entity. He seems
to feel his own presence in England now as a reflection of an
historical logic which made sixteenth-century England the natural heir
affirmation of the staying power of cultural unity. Florence was the
Siena. He mentions other Italian cities ~(The Romans were the
IT is easy, say, for a Florentine to accept foreigners, but
they do not usually see the reality behind the fa&ccedil;ade of Tuscan
easy-going optimism. It hides a preoccupation with death, a
questioning of what life means, and a practical attitude towards art.
For Zeffirelli, the genius of the Florentine renaissance lies in its
have realised all this. Romeo and Juliet is very un-Italian &mdash;
There are many English girls like Juliet. An Italian girl would
You Like It is very Florentine, and full of a workmanlike
A limited stake in the Bard might be inferred from the fact that
he has directed, in England, two of Shakespeare's Mediterranean
plays. He firmly repudiates this. He will probably direct
idea, like a poet. The idea for Romeo and Juliet was the
Othello is the sentimental tragedy of a cultivated, brave
Zeffirelli does not mention the colour of Othello's skin, but his
bogy of cutting Shakespeare, and scholarly interpretation. The former
a tradition to the scholar.
IN spite of his apparently complete immersion in theatre,
too long. It may be that his ubiquitous talent (he supervises costume
down to the last buttonhole) exhausts him. It may be that he is
typically Florentine, fighting death along the theatre's shore-line of
make-believe. One's guess is that the war (he was a partisan) left
consider directing is Mother Courage. Alienation is
done terrible things to the soul of man. Perhaps it is
ask about his high-powered sports car. He thinks of a theatre in
British Theatre. You have the best theatre in the world, the best
best... English people live in a pattern, and theatre-going is part
of that pattern. He admires English actors for their discipline,
except obscurely to declare that you cannot separate the artistic and
personal life.
unequivocally great in the art or the intensely human, Zeffirelli's
about Wesker and Delaney; yes, they seemed powerful, but all report.
The trouble was that they were too late, old-fashioned. All this
elsewhere. But, implying and mitigating their weakness in one breath,
he added that perhaps at the beginning of any movement you had to have
runs smoothly.
THE WELL-BRED SNEERS THAT WOULD STIFLE TALENT...
LONG, long ago, Mr. Noel Coward wrote an autobiography
called Present Indicative.
Their shirts and flannels were yellow and well used against
their ankles, so unlike mine of too thin silk, caught up by intricate
seemed to know what they were going to say long before they said it.
certain quality of youthfulness that I had never known. And although
No change
this last couple of weeks he has been shooting off his predictably
And Mr. Coward is still obsessed by the immensely important
He still feels old and over-experienced. He still has the air of
terribly, terribly, definitely out of the picture.
In fact, the only advance &mdash; and that a slight one &mdash; is that he
seems to have stopped writing sentences with no verbs in them.
petulant, bewildered, inaccurate, and shabby attack on the playwrights
and players of today anyone foolish enough to trust him as a guide to
was going on in it.
fuller of good stuff, and our auditoriums of enthusiastic audiences,
than for many years.
They would have no idea that the current British theatrical
renaissance is having an effect far beyond the West End of London, so
that Broadway is heavily influenced by the highly successful plays of
today that it has imported from Britain.
They would never discover that our writers and players are
exciting as well as excited, that they speak in tones of passion and
belief and deep, proud faith. They would not be told that the
Above all, they would never, never know that the New Wave &mdash; and
it is the one thing that Mr. Coward can no more forgive than he can
understand &mdash; is supremely successful, or that his own latest offering
So nice
YET it is Mr. Coward &mdash; too old nearly 40 years ago, mark
you &mdash; who offers himself as the man to lead the poor, stumbling
I think it is time that the case for the British theatre of today
Robert Bolt, Arnold Wesker, John Mortimer, Shelagh Delaney, John
Arden, N. F. Simpson, Harold Pinter, Lionel Bart, Peter Shaffer,
Willis Hall. They write about a gigantic range of different people,
Mr. Bolt in A Man for All Seasons, took us to the Court of
In the one, a dark, rich portrait of a saint wrestling with his
who grows whole under the impact of tragedy.
Exquisite
MR. WESKER, in his exquisite trilogy, ranges from the
Ronnie, from the dying of the old to the rebirth of the young.
Park, explored the hearts of characters middle-class enough to
satisfy even Mr. Coward.
From Mr. Mortimer and Mr. Simpson we have come to expect wit,
to tell us have disappeared from our stages. And Mr. Simpson's
Waiting in the Wings seem bad even if it weren't.
more traditional quarters have found hard to come by lately. In
short, from them all we get a huge, bursting cornucopia of every kind
of writing, every kind of plot, every kind of setting, every kind of
Belief
can only squeak kitchen sink and dustbin drama. In fact,
only one play in the last few years has had a dustbin in it, and that
was by an Irishman who writes in French. Only one has a kitchen sink
savagely to rend squalor and those who perpetuate it.
Which brings me to what I think is the clue &mdash; the common factor
shared by many of our younger playwrights, and the element which above
all produces uncomprehending rage in Mr. Coward.
AT the top of 14 uncarpeted stairs in a Notting Hill mews
This was obligatory, because Logue owns one typewriter, 500
Scottish poet who chain-smoked cigarettes made out of loose tobacco,
and remarked from time to time: Do ye not find the whisky in
Nobody seems to care about any modern poet nowadays except John
Princess Margaret said she liked his verse.
But what are the other fellows up to? How do they live? I got
some interesting answers from Logue and Singer, and later from an
American, Theodore Roethke, who has actually made poetry pay.
He has published half a dozen books of poetry and achieved a
wider reputation when he wrote the lyrics for the Royal Court Theatre
musical The Lily-White Boys.
I actually made quite good money then, said Logue. For
the eight weeks the show ran I earned &pound;85 a week. But that
He was paid exactly that for one article in the American teenage
Christopher Logue writes fierce, noisy poems about war, love, and
Logue. Son of a Southampton civil servant, he was brought up by
I now believe in the total abolition of private property, he
lay down again.
A gleam of gold shone in the front teeth of Burns Singer as he
lit his fifth home-made cigarette. He said: Of course, Christopher
believes that propoganda and politics are part of poetry.
myself.
Logue leaped to his feet at this heresy and shouted: Original
Flames
showers burning tobacco strands on his flossy gold beard he is bound
In love, he wrote: &mdash;
Smiles in another.
like a bride
Dreamers only part of the time, poets show an acute interest in
money, mainly because of the difficulty they have in laying their
the B.B.C. go down to 10d. a line for longer broadcast works.
Poets write reviews and do journalism to make a living.
raging voice. I want a car. I want to eat out in restaurants. You
know who I'd like to be? I'd like to be president of U.S.
Steel!
Burns Singer, once a fish-chasing zoologist at Aberdeen Marine
Professor
great shambling American poet big as a house and earning enough money
told me: My great year was 1958, when I picked up &pound;10,000 in
various prizes, including an award from the Ford Foundation.
As a working Professor of English at the University of
But the amount he gets by actually writing poetry and getting it
published is only about &pound;1,000 a year.
Journey
ROETHKE'S best man when he married, was W. H. Auden, who
poetry, said Roethke. I doubt if anybody does, except maybe
Robert Frost.
As characters, poets range from rhyming layabouts to saintly
Statement to M.P.s This Week:
B.A.O.R. Will Get Key Men
SMALL CALL-UP POSSIBLE
BY OUR MILITARY REPORTER
PLANS for strengthening Britain's strategic reserve
division will be announced by Mr Watkinson, Minister of Defence, in
the Commons this week. Some units have been recently redeployed to
form a division for service in Germany should the situation there
continue to deteriorate.
No indication has been given of what this increase will be, or
it may be that some limited numbers of reserve units may be affected.
strategic reserve division in Britain is also deficient, and to bring
it to full strength it is unlikely that further depletion of overseas
AMERICAN CRITICISM
America's plan for a three-stage defence structure will be followed.
Under this plan Washington aims to meet an initial enemy
But the British defence policy, as laid down in the 1957 Sandys
Plan, is showing signs of wobbling. Defence spokesmen now qualify the
the circumstances, strength and area of the attack.
the original Sandys policy is dead as a dodo.
\DE GAULLE WILL SEE PREMIER ON BERLIN
BY GORDON BROOK-SHEPHERD
PRESIDENT and Madame \de Gaulle will pay a private visit to
come for a frank exchange of views on the international situation
with Russia.
It is believed in London that nearly all the weekend visit will
be devoted to what one British official described as quiet and
I understand the main purpose of the meeting will be to plot an
Concession Made
In the last few days General \de Gaulle is reported to have won
what amounts to an important concession from his allies. A major
Americans and West Germans which partly reflects the French line of
remaining tough with Mr Khruschev.
It is understood that the British and American envoys in Moscow
have been empowered if necessary to seek an emergency standstill
step to broader negotiations. This could be informal in the sense
that no document need be signed.
Short-term Basis
It could be reached at ambassadorial level, taking the form of
an East-West declaration re-affirming Allied rights and
responsibilities in Berlin, if only on a short-term basis. The
that favoured in the talks with the Soviet Foreign Minister, Mr.
question of Berlin alone.
French and West German fears that such a broader agenda would
involve the West in dangerous concessions have contributed to the
The West now seems to have adopted Mr. Khruschev's famous
a short term stabilisation agreement can be reached on Berlin in the
West Germany could be tackled as a separate step.
may try to exploit President Kennedy's impatience with Western
Private Contacts
As part of this campaign an invitation may well be sent to the
American Secretary of State, Mr. Dean Rusk, to visit Moscow.
RUSSIA AND CHINA IN STRUGGLE FOR AFRICA
illustrates that global rivalry between Peking and Moscow, of which
the current dispute over Albania is only the symbol.
Communist powers have begun to clash head-on. The Russians, who have
built up a huge Embassy with a staff of nearly 300 in Mogadishu, the
capital, support the established Government.
The Chinese operate through a smaller mission, but have a New
China News Agency in addition, whereas the Russians have no Tass
dissident opposition groups, including the extremist Pan-Somali
This aims at uniting all Somalis, including those in neighbouring
Kenya and Ethiopia, under one rule.
Chinese support takes the form of secret money subsidies, and the
to have been given guerrilla training, on the pattern recently
reported for candidates from the Cameroun Republic.
Moscow's concern for good relations with Ethiopia, where a major
Soviet effort is being made. But the issue is also a basic
ideological one.
openly decrying the more moderate Soviet line.
To support this campaign, the Chinese have developed a radio
propaganda barrage nearly twice as heavy as the Russian effort.
Peking Radio now has a total output of 91 hours a week broadcasting
compares with the Soviet Union's tally of 54 1/2 hours a week.
Seven different Chinese agencies have been identified running
Whereas the Russians keep mainly to standard cultural missions and
student training schemes, the Chinese get down to jungle roots.
They are covering the dark continent with troupes of acrobats,
dancers and jugglers who travel from village to village. Needless to
say the jugglers start spinning Marxist slogans as soon as they have
finished their advertised act.
Guinea. The other main centres of Chinese penetration are the Cote
\d'Ivoire, Zanzibar and Mozambique.
among the black population of South Africa. This would give Peking a
Soviet Tanks Out-Faced by Americans
From REGINALD PECK
THE withdrawal of Russian and American tanks from the
Friedrichstrasse crossing point today brought some relaxation of
tension in Berlin. But the opposing tanks remained within a mile of
each other.
First to back down in the war of nerves were the Russians, and as
their T-34 tanks rumbled away an American official was heard to say:
to give up their practice of enforcing their right of uncontrolled
access to East Berlin by sending officials through the
has now been made.
U.S. plane's defiance
overflying East Berlin. It circled for about ten minutes at about 600
feet over an area where 40 Russian tanks were parked.
Col. Soloviev, the Russian Commandant in Berlin last night sent
mission in Berlin today said their planes have every right to fly over
all of the city.
arrived might continue indefinitely. Angry West Berliners twice
mobbed Russian cars, booing and kicking the vehicles.
It had been reported that more Russian tanks have reached East
military jeeps outside the ruins of the Prinzenpalais in Unter \den
Linden, where the first Russian tanks were based 48 hours ago.
At checkpoint Charlie my passport was examined by Communist
cocoa. The only civilian in sight was a grey-haired woman who said
MR. BROWN WORRIED BY B.A.O.R.
SUNDAY TELEGRAPH REPORTER
MR. GEORGE BROWN, the Labour Party's spokesman on
defence, arrived at London Airport yesterday after a four-day
inspection of the British Army of the Rhine. He said he was more
worried after his visit than before.
of men in medical units.
In equipment there was a shortage of radios, some arms and
Other overseas commitments, particularly in the Far East, should be
re-examined to see if such large numbers of men need be tied down.
Conscription was not the answer to the need for men.
Atlantic Treaty Organisation, he replied: We are as well able to do
of the whole N.A.T.O. army that worries me and our role in that.
whether the politicians' statements are clear to the military generals
and to Air Force chiefs.
FROM A SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
FIVE twin-engined German Dorniers for the new Air Force
Elizabethville. They are the first of nearly 50 planes which have
been ordered to strengthen Katanga's defences.
The British military authorities describe the operation as a very
In New York the Security Council is meeting at 11 a.m.
today at the special request of both Britain and Kuwait. And in
In London yesterday, as the first British troops and aircraft
Opposition, went to Admiralty House to hear the inside story of the
Then last night at Bowood, Calne, Wilts, the Premier,
Government is doing about the threat by Premier Kassem of Iraq to
annexe Kuwait &mdash; and why.
words and that the Government of Iraq will refrain from any aggressive
action, he said.
But he added, We must take no risk and in view of the language
that is being used and the indications of a military build-up which
him some protectionary strength.
Mr. Gaitskell, speaking at Bristol, said he could not see how
asked to put in a force to replace them as soon as possible.
The first British troops in, about 600 Royal Marines of 42
Commando and 150 men of the Third Dragoon Guards with 14 Centurion
tanks, went ashore at Kuwait in a shade temperature of 120 degrees.
The Marines had come racing up the searingly hot Persian Gulf
in the Royal Navy carrier Bulwark, which set out from Karachi on
And the Dragoon Guards were put ashore from the tank landing
Almost simultaneously a squadron of R.A.F. Hawker Hunter jet
vessels of the amphibious warfare squadron circled before anchoring,
apparently just outside the three-mile limit.
ALERTED
Soon afterwards it was announced in Kuwait that an unknown
number of Saudi Arabian troops had also arrived. And that eight
Gulf air base at Sharjah.
Men of the Devonshire and Dorset Regiments and the 2nd
Battalion of the Parachute Regiment in Cyprus were said to have been
alerted for a move.
Coldstream Guards and King's Regiment were soon ready to be airlifted
Britons who live there. But it was stated officially that there are
no thoughts of evacuation unless the situation deteriorates seriously.
Iraq had been closed.
Terms before we join Common Market
BRITAIN has made it quite clear that she must make conditions
R. A. Butler yesterday.
our Commonwealth partners and our friends in the European Free Trade
Association, he told Conservatives at Harrogate.
A paper published yesterday by the non-Party P.E.P.
(Political and Economic Planning) says most British farmers will not
Some farmers might gain. But horticulturists would have to
meet keener competition unless imports were restricted by some other
means than tariffs.
The National Farmers' Union said the P.E.P. study did not
NOW KRUSCHEV HOTS UP THE BERLIN CRISIS
MR. KRUSCHEV today made two ominous moves &mdash; and another
threatening statement &mdash; on the heightening German crisis. He
suspended all planned reductions in Soviet armed forces. He
he said: &mdash;
armed forces to administer a worthy rebuff to any aggressor if he
It is best for those who think of war not to imagine that
distance will save them&hellip;.. We have everything at our disposal to
solve successfully the responsible tasks facing us.
Razor edge
And while the Soviet leader was talking the Nato Council in
The contents of the Note, which is in reply to one handed to
President Kennedy in Vienna on June 4, are not known. But it is
As the news pours in from around the world, beleagured
Berlin this weekend is a city on a razor's edge.
up vast stocks of food against the possibility of another siege of
their city, believed the West was determined to stand fast in the face
of all Communist threats.
that the Americans might not be prepared to risk war on these issues
after all.
From this distance it appears that the United States Government
is ready to accept East German control of the West's tenuous
life-lines through the Communist Zone to the isolated city.
the Soviet leader is faced at last with the necessity of doing
something about it, whether he likes it or not.
One reason: to satisfy the impatient leaders of impoverished,
struggling East Germany who, says Herr Brandt, in many respects tend
to be more Russian than the Russians.
does intend this time to make a separate peace treaty with East
Privately, though, Herr Brandt is not at all convinced that the
Russians see eye to eye with the East Germans over a change in the
status of West Berlin.
This in spite of the fact that Soviet propaganda frequently
refers to the present set-up as a thorn in the flesh, a bone in
rationed.
Russians, I suspect, see West Berlin as a safety valve. It calms the
feelings of many in East Germany to know that their symbol of freedom
is here, close by; to know that there is a way out.
campaigns, all kinds of passive resistance.
Herr Brandt believes that until now the Russians have actually
Today Gerhard Eiseler, the East German propaganda chief, made a
Says Herr Brandt: If it comes it may be far less dramatic,
He cannot see it taking as blunt a turn as a new blockade on the
COME ON BRITAIN!
By The Chancellor
We've got to pull up our socks
GRIM-FACED and speaking with quiet emphasis, Mr. Selwyn
Lloyd gave the country a tough pep talk yesterday. Come on, Britain,
we've got to pull up our socks &mdash; that was the burden of his fighting
I am not afraid, he said, to ask the British people to
bear the necessary burdens or accept the necessary disciplines
designed to secure not just the survival but also the maintenance of
our position as an up-to-date, progressive, dynamic influence on the
world.
house-party where his new measures to deal with Britain's financial
crisis will be on the agenda.
Here are other points from his speech yesterday, delivered at a
The trade balance at the present time, in spite of better
In a tough competitive world, we as a nation are not doing well
enough. That is not a new discovery. I have warned the country again
production or services.
growth, until we have made an improvement in our export performance
far beyond anything we have yet achieved.
costs, whatever their origin, a relentless rooting-out of all
inefficiency, restrictiveness and waste, whether it be of capital
resources or of labour.
management or labour, that are far too readily accepted now.
We cannot afford the easy complacency with which increases in
costs derived from these and similar inefficiencies are added to
really earn the incomes that are paid.
better direction, more efficiency and economy in our effort.
OVERDRAWN
indeed are essential if we are not to slip back into becoming a
second-rate economy with declining standards of living.
We cannot reward ourselves in advance of actual achievement by
wages.
SUPER RACING
By Don Clarke
GOT your ticket for the Sunday Pictorial sponsored World
Championship Speedway British Final (start 7.15 p.m.) at Wembley
Stadium on Saturday?
Don't waste time. The meeting is not being televised, and
Pic-sponsored championships.
Never before have fans been promised such a feast of speed with
the meeting alight.
Knutsson.
At Southampton Fundin was beaten in two straight runs and
suffered the indignity of crashing and wrecking his machine in his
effort to conquer Knutsson. Temper and the needle element flared.
THE second leg takes place at Norwich next Friday &mdash; and Fundin
should even the score.
If this happens, the final leg will be decided at Wembley next
Saturday, before the sixteen riders stake claims for the British title
Jack Young, Barry Briggs and Peter Craven.
For Wimbledon's Ronnie Moore, twice Champion, this may be his
last season after ten World Finals. Jack Young is also a doubtful
The fact that he rides in such exalted company will not deter
Scott.
NINE months ago Mike Broadbanks (Swindon) was advised by his
But the Red Devil possesses a stubborn streak, and has
proved them all wrong by battling his way to Wembley.
That is a pen picture of half a dozen aces. The other ten
competitors can well upset the applecart for the favourites.
Ron How, Bob Andrews, Cyril Maidment (Wimbledon); Peter Moore,
tickets NOW.
These can be obtained from your local tracks until Tuesday, or
direct from Speedway Box Office, Wembley Stadium, Wembley, Middlesex.
Prices are: Covered seats: 21s., 12s. 6d., 10s. 6d.
PLUCKY GELSON
Brentford 1. Reading 2.
performance that has brought them twelve goals in their opening three
games of the season.
Brentford played some promising stuff in midfield, but were
unable to put it to advantage.
defensive star in pluckily holding out the determined Reading raids
for long periods.
Webb scored Reading's second-half winner, a Vallard penalty being
their other. An own goal from Splers was Brentford's only
TRAGEDY hit this match in the sixty-fifth minute when Chelsea
delightful attacking football till the interval, but, as usual, they
Chelsea moved well at the start, despite Villa's seventh-minute
lead. Bobby Thompson headed through following a corner.
Chelsea, however, equalised after twenty-four minutes. Cliss
cleverly flicked the ball to Ron Tindall, who pushed it through for
Dougan's persistency enabled young Harry Burrows to put Villa
DYSON GRAB
Spurs 4, Arsenal 3: By SAM LEITCH
CHEEKY, cocky left winger Terry Dyson and his
hell-of-a-hat-trick squeezed both points Spurs' way. But, oh, what
vile luck for the Gunners!
having led 2-0 inside twenty minutes.
by the magic head of Mel Charles. Twice he outjumped the tall,
commanding Tottenham defenders. Twice he scored &mdash; in the 67th and
72nd minutes.
big brother John in getting them &mdash; and they put Arsenal in command.
Then enter whirlwind Dyson. He had already notched one
But tiny Terry wagged his foot at a Cliff Jones corner and the
The Gunners and their fans were still fuming when Dyson lammed in
Spurs' match-winner off the post.
This is a good Arsenal side. They will not meet Dyson's devilish
opportunism every week. And they won't have so much bad luck.
Mel Charles to get by centre half Maurice Norman.
minutes before the end after colliding with Allen, has slight
Wolves 3, West Ham 2: By STAN HALSEY
side-stepped a defender and scored a masterly goal with a twenty-yard
rising drive. And though Murray equalised in thirty-three minutes,
It was in the fifty-fifth minute. Alan Hinton, Wolves' left
winger who was playing his first League game, harassed Kirkup into
conceding a corner.
Leslie, thought danger had been averted.
But the ball developed such a crazy spin that Leslie could not
That goal was just the tonic Wolves needed, and in the
score 3-1.
Three minutes from the end a typical bit of Woosnam Soccer
Southend... 1
the visiting sharpshooters.
A blind drive by Bleanch went off a defender to outside left Bob
Kellard, who easily beat White with a close range shot.
Ron Rafferty headed Grimsby's sixtieth minute  and Mike
And only a minute from the end, left winger Cliff Jones cut in to
Cool Neill is twice given slip
lanky centre half of Arsenal, set a poser for the Northern Ireland
fine international prospect, snuffed the experienced McAdams
completely out of the play.
suspect defence seem better than it really was, and left McAdams
But twice, the tough and persistent McAdams evaded the Neill
obstacle with two brilliant pieces of opportunism and chalked up two
goals which deservedly gave Bolton their second victory of the season.
flash and fired smartly past the bewildered McLelland.
then. And he did little else until he scored another fine goal in
seventy-five minutes when he beat two men in a yard or so and whizzed
Though the Arsenal goal had had several narrow escapes,
championship contenders.
BRILLIANT BRIGGS IS TOP MAN
Sunday Pictorial-sponsored British final of the world championship at
in 1957 and 1958, showed his world class when he notched fifteen
immaculate points to win the Pic's first prize of &pound;300, presented to
him by comedian Terry-Thomas.
Pint-sized Peter Craven (Belle Vue and England) took the second
gained third place for a prize of &pound;80.
Without detracting from the superb performance of Briggs,
Craven and Moore, my heroes of the night were two Englishmen &mdash;
Swindon's Mike Broadbanks and Wimbledon's Cyril Maidment.
Both these boys set the 50,000 crowd alight in Heat 4 when
nerves in his first Wembley final.
Broadbanks just clinching victory.
Maidment continued his rip-roaring, full-throttle riding in his
next four rides.
Although outclassed in his last outing, he notched seven points
on the night to stake a claim for the world final at Malmo on
September 15.
TRAGEDY
An attack of asthma left him gasping for air and how he managed
to stay on his machine for four more rides, let alone score four more
points and a place at Malmo is beyond me.
(Swindon), 7 pts.
Young, Genz, Maidment and Broadbanks will have to run to decide
who will be odd man out at Malmo on September 15, where they clash
with seven Continentals for the honour of wearing the World crown.
(Sweden), Bjorn Knutsson (Sweden), Igor Piechanov (Russia), Rune
Sormander (Sweden), Florian Kapala (Poland), Stanislaw Txocz
(Czechoslovakia) and Gote Nordin (Sweden).
BIG SEARCH IN SCOTLAND
by STAN HALSEY
Cheque in Scotland! Excuse the play on words, but that's what
it could amount to where Spurs and Chelsea are concerned.
Bill Nicholson, Spurs boss, has money to spend to maintain
He made another quiet trip across the border the other day and
mind a tilt at Sassenach fame and fortune.
by TOM FORREST
HORSE-RACING'S happiest invalid today is jockey Bobby Elliot.
the Cesarewitch at Newmarket on Saturday.
Young bones mend quickly. But the back of a big-race favourite
is no place for a jockey with one wing trailing, so Elliot will have
find a substitute.
Top-class riders are still available... like Ron Hutchinson or,
likely choice as he rode Avon's Pride in his gallop yesterday morning.
three Cesarewitch horses recommended a week ago for Autumn Double bets
remains as a first-rate value-for-money proposition.
Alcoa's odds have tumbled from 25-1 to 14-1.
They could still win, but if you have to take these new prices it
Avon's Pride has been reduced too, but less spectacularly &mdash; from
14-1 to 12-1. This is a rate that could still be confidently accepted
without the feeling of being short-changed. The four-year-old's
chance is outstanding.
He has the speed... any horse who can play so powerful a part
Handicap, will not be found short of sheer pace with half a mile
Pride was in Epsom's Roseberry Handicap, of the same 2 1/4-mile length
as the Cesarewitch.
under the ordeal of that long, lung-bursting Cesarewitch straight.
never outbattled.
The weight. At 7st. 11lb., 3lb. below the middle of
the range, the handicapper has certainly taken an indulgent line.
produce quite unexpected reserves to beat Avon's Pride this week. And
through these horses most of the others can be declared safely held.
Technique, rather than tactics, will be needed from the jockey.
style, or the colt might well idle his chance away.
El Surpriso is one they all have to beat. There was no
Almost as lightly burdened at 7st. 2lb., is Alcoa.
Though less obviously thrown in at the weights, Alcoa is such
a rugged, unrelenting stayer that Mick Greening is sure to be driving
the ground.
Among the class horses &mdash; the top half dozen, with weights of
Morecambe is left out because no eight-year-old has ever won
New Brig because he has not raced since May; Agreement because
to warm up.
Honest Boy Aristarchus, Cold Comfort, Tarquinian and Narratus
enough.
SUSPECT
Persian Lancer's stamina is suspect for a horse at the short
unless he can hear his feet rattle.
Hock-deep mud would be ideal though for Annotation (20-1) and
Python (20-1), both powerful but one-paced plodders. And game
rivals' heels. He will refuse to race if any hits his face.
None of the others seems at all likely to win, and I rate Night
Porter and Sunny Way the best of the long shots. But the final
placings I hope for are AVON'S PRIDE 1, El Surpriso 2, Alcoa 3.
Nobody would call the three raiders a force to flash triumphantly
targets to be blasted aside in the hurricane rush of Right Royal.
JUST GREAT is no sitter... though he staged something like a
sit-down strike at the starting gate to lose his St. Leger chance.
He lost the Derby too through rough-house treatment by other horses.
In four remaining races this year, Just Great had a fair chance,
New partner Lester Piggott must get him off with the rest, steer
clear of trouble... and who knows to what heights Just Great may rise?
Formidable
HIGH HAT is less of a mystery. We know he is no match for
That is a formidable qualification. Duncan Keith rides.
TENACITY has not yet attacked the top class. But what an
Yet to make any of our trio more than an each-way bet would be
more patriotic than prudent. Right Royal is not the only star in
opposition.
chance to make amends for the suicidal tactics which cost them the
Doncaster St. Leger.
Italian crack Molvedo, with a runaway success at Deauville on his
last French trip, shapes like another Ribot. So he should &mdash; he is a
son of Ribot, and Ribot's jockey, veteran Enrico Camiel rides him too.
But in that chestnut-strewn Longchamp paddock they will all be
dominated by the magnificence of the loose-limbed giant RIGHT ROYAL.
the pre-race parade.
T. F.
I TOOK a ride, a few days ago, on an echo from the past &mdash;
on a small-framed, brown four-year-old named Vulgate. The echo? &mdash;
were sired by the top jumping stallions Vulgan and King Hal.
because Lochroe was the best-moving 'chaser I have known.
youngster can be seen on Saturday at Fontwell, where he comes out for
At home he does not wear shoes on his hind feet. None of the
foreleg &mdash; a frequent occurrence &mdash; the injury is restricted to
No shoes are needed for road work. The stable yard, on the top
to open commons.
produce others, even if not of the same standard, and generally in
steeplechasers it is the influence of the mare which predominates.
appallingly they all do!), regardless of the sire.
Most remarkable examples of half-brothers are Gay Donald and Pas
Seul. Both these Gold Cup winners &mdash; by Gay Light and Erin's Pride
respectively &mdash; had Pas \de Quatre for their dam.
Both, broken and trained by different trainers, were blundering
jumpers until they were seven, at which age they began to outgrow
their carelessness, and their getaway burst of speed took over.
RELATED
sister &mdash; Vindicated (now with Guy Cunard) and Lady Nenagh &mdash; made their
mark for Verly Bewicke, many of whose horses are related to each
other.
Another North-country star, Rough Tweed, winner of Manchester's
Champion Novice 'Chase last April, will have a full-brother running
over here this season.
early in December.
And I will be most interested in this Irish Youngster's progress.
month &mdash; and he showed he is an apt pupil learning fast.
Honeymoor, ante-post favourite for the Cambridgeshire
favourites at 16-1.
London Scottish 6 Northampton 8: by JOHN REED
ONE must hand it to skipper Phil Taylor and his burly
Northampton men. They shook Richmond rigid three weeks ago at the
Athletic Ground with a grip of iron. Yesterday on the same ground
And the Saints showed what a great side they can be. How rewarding,
then, that the winning try should be scored by beefy Taylor himself.
Jeeps booted the ball high ahead, and Scottish full-back Gordon
It was to prove an expensive error. For the rampaging
Northampton forwards were up in a flash, Clive Daniels whipped the
It would have taken a brick wall to stop him, as he dived over in
asunder. Right wing Frank Sykes, dodging and darting past grasping
neatly on the bounce and shot through to score under the posts.
Full-back Roger Hosen converted.
Great rally
Northampton had staged a great rally. In the first half they
had looked listless and a little tired in comparison with the
Johnson, who may well win an England trial this season, outhooked
Ernie wants a showdown on the beer bid
A PETROL pump attendant who found himself mixed up in a
&pound;21,000,000 takeover bid, said last night he was going to have a
show-down with his managing director.
I want to get this mess sorted out, said 51-year-old
Ernest Clements. It's ridiculous.
I'm mixed up in a deal involving millions &mdash; and I earn only
firm.
Mr. Clements, of Ifield Road, Fulham, is registered as a
director of Anglasi Nominees, a &pound;100 company in the City.
After Anglasi announced a &pound;21,000,000 takeover bid for Bent's
Stepbrothers
Financial adviser is Mr. Ron Foster.
Clements, as he downed a double Scotch in a London pub last night.
I've never bought a share in my life.
SACK THE MANAGER CRY FANS
outside Newcastle United Football Club's ground yesterday.
certain to be relegated to the Football League's Division Two.
climbed the club's flagpole and hauled the Union Jack to half mast.
It was a riotous day for soccer...
Matthews in his dressing room for more than half-an-hour after Hitchin
APPLE CORES and orange peel were thrown at policemen at
citizens, instead of trying to kid the world they are NOT hungry.
Toronto, to Mayor Nathan Phillips.
Mayor Phillips, wealthy head of a law firm, is more than 4,000
miles away on a holiday tour of Europe with his wife &mdash; and issuing
denials that there is hunger in his home city.
will find Toronto a city without jobs. A city where hungry men, women
and children line up for food at charity soup kitchens.
Mayor Phillips was challenged by a Toronto newspaper to tour the
of starvation in Toronto are all wrong, he said.
People series on the hardship a Briton met in Canada and
insisted: There is no starvation in Toronto.
And at home in Toronto last Thursday 250 of the Mayor's civic
the girls took their final examinations to become State Registered
It was not the first time this had happened at the 134-bed
General Hospital at Great Yarmouth.
failed the examinations.
And when the latest batch of results was revealed yesterday, it
started a storm at Great Yarmouth.
An angry parent of one student nurse who failed said: This
hundred-per-cent. failure is shocking.
Registered Nurse examinations.
A hospital committee meeting is being called to discuss the
matter.
Yarmouth Hospital Management Committee.
Its matron is named in the Hospital Year Book as Miss G.
give complete training in nursing.
by their spinster boss to stop shortening their skirts.
shortened them by tucking them over at the waist. Then Chief
Miss Alexander, who wears a long skirt, is also angry with the
Mrs. Williams said yesterday: I do not think my skirt is too
short. It is just below my knees.
to be done.
Moore &mdash; said: There is a standard pattern for the length of
All worked up about statue of a worker
engineer at work. But when the union members saw how the statue was
shaping they were FURIOUS...
committee &mdash; shows an engineer with his coat half on and half off.
Sculptor Paddison says the engineer is taking his coat OFF &mdash;
eager to get to work.
ON &mdash; eager to get AWAY from work.
And that, they complain, creates a false impression that the
as I'm concerned, the man is taking his coat off &mdash; and that's the way
The 4 ft. high statue will be finished in six weeks and shown
at the local art gallery.
THE B-AND-B RAIDER
POLICE were yesterday searching for the bed-and-breakfast
Birmingham, he set an alarm clock belonging to one of the staff and
He stole about &pound;3 from the canteen, which he entered with the
help of factory tools, and also helped himself to eggs and milk.
Gaoled woman let out &mdash; to steal
A WOMAN serving a two-year sentence at Holloway was taken
was allowed out for four hours.
She went to the West End and committed her 14th crime; she stole
two blouses from a store, it was said at Marlborough Street yesterday.
The magistrate, Mr. Paul Bennett, V.C., discharged Mrs.
Kathleen Clark, of Grenville Street, King's Cross, absolutely and
ordered her return to hospital.
Bow-WOW of a party
FIFTY dogs will sit down to pop and buns, or biscuits, at
guests will be dog lovers from all over the country.
MOTHER SOLD CHILD &mdash; FOR 28s.
A MOTHER was arrested yesterday and charged with selling her
five-year-old daughter for &pound;1 8s.
She is 33-year-old Mrs. Elsie Joseph, of Seattle, Washington
State, whose husband, August, is wanted by the police on a similar
charge.
Seattle police say that a Mr. Wilbert Bippus, 35, told them he
and his wife had wanted to adopt a child and he offered to buy the
THE banking family of Lubbock has had its biggest shock since
son Jeremy, fresh down from university, flouted mother when she
pleaded, Darling, DON'T become a musician.
So a Receiving Order in Bankruptcy has been served on him &mdash; and
said about that?
deputy governor.
Spurned
And what is FATHER saying? For father Michael Lubbock, a
But is the banker's son (family motto ~The Author Makes the
out. I have the money although I am disputing the debt.
You know, he said, I'm no dabbler at music. It is my
career.
BISHOP ASKS COUPLE TO FORGIVE PARSON
THE Bishop of Coventry is to ask a vicar why he did not marry
two teenage parishioners.
The vicar is the Rev. Eric Jarvis, of the Warwickshire village
marry them unless he was ordered to by his Bishop.
Barry's mother protested to the Bishop. He has written back
saying he is glad the marriage did take place, and adding: &mdash;
forgive and forget, and that you will urge the young couple to receive
Last night Barry, of Birmingham Road, Ansley, said: From the
Christians in the parish.
He said that if he were told to marry us he would resign.
I went back and told the vicar that we would be married in
meant his resignation otherwise.
elsewhere was theirs.
would write to the Bishop and if he told me to marry them I would have
Mr. Forte To The Rescue?
A SCHEME to unscramble the so-called Jasper group of
companies may be announced before the end of this month. For some
time now negotiations have been going on between the State Building
an offer &mdash; on the basis of independent accountants' valuations &mdash; for
all the shares in all the group companies, whose stock exchange
Altogether, the State has lent about &pound;7 million to various
companies in the group, but the chief problem is the &pound;3 1/4 million
Mr. Joseph foregoing a considerable part of this, as well as on
Society, now also in prison) surrendering the greater part of their
own personal holdings in group companies.
Piccadilly, Rubens and Rembrandt hotels in London, as well as a number
Classic chain of repertory cinemas. Finally, there are 43
billiard halls for which Mr. Forte may well have other plans.
hinges on finding a property group to take over this aspect of the
Grunwald empire.
this, but a well-known &pound;15 million London group specialising in
residential property seems at present the most likely bet.
Things at last seem to be looking up for the thousands of
long-suffering State Building Society depositors. Even if the present
scheme falls through &mdash; which now seems unlikely &mdash; there is a City
merchant bank now waiting quietly on the sidelines with an alternative
New Recruit
MR. GERALD GLOVER'S election last week to the board of City
immense possibilities has  made eyes other than those of
Among other things, Mr. Glover is chairman of Edger
the Carlton Tower Hotel in Sloane Street, London. Like many another
Perhaps even more important, however, for Edger is the backing it
and whose shares have so far this year risen from 81s. to a new high
of 110s, is in turn controlled by the wealthy McAlpine family.
Until now the only connection between CLRP and the
McAlpine-Glover interests lay in the vast Stag Brewery site at
by Development Securities and 24 p.c. by Edger.
The new move should at least serve to boost the pace of
proportionately &mdash; benefit most. With a yield of little more than 1
IMPERIAL CHEMICAL INDUSTRIES should certainly have no
difficulty in finding underwriters for its next rights issue. As
being rejected by the more progressive companies, of letting the
It is of course true, as Mr. Paul Chambers, the ICI
chairman, has pointed out, that at the time of the issue the rights
were to be sold for the benefit of the shareholders whose rights they
But this is a matter of principle. Underwriters are adequately
shareholders. ICI should be setting a better example than
Forward Strip
WHAT tax changes are likely in this month's Budget? One
Tax to replace the present combination of income tax and profits tax
believe, be welcomed by the inland Revenue (normally averse to any
against the dividend strippers.
For those few readers unacquainted with this sport I should
perhaps explain that dividend stripping is essentially a device for
extracting accumulated reserves from a private trading company without
paying tax. In its simplest form it used to work in the following
way.
are then left with the company plus &pound;100,000 in cash &mdash; the object of
The finance company, however, whose business is dealing in shares
Revenue's Chagrin
Last year's Finance Act &mdash; in particular the blanket
Section 28 &mdash; was meant to have put a stop to all this. But although
the crude method just outlined is no longer possible, a roaring trade
is still being done &mdash; much to the Revenue's chagrin &mdash; in some of the
methods known among the professionals as the Scissors, Stock
Shunting and the Forward Strip.
The first two are highly complex operations, usually used in
In essence what happens is that the drop in value of the shares
in this company (at the end of the five years they are worthless) is
Reyrolle: Phoenix
brought trading profits down from the peak of &pound;3,909,000 in 1955 by
nearly &pound;1 million.
the market is not particularly sanguine that 1960 will have seen much
further recovery &mdash; profit margins were probably too slim for that.
research has probably not been in force long enough to bring big
Meanwhile Reyrolle has never cut its dividend which has been held
at the equivalent of 8 1/4 per cent on present capital for the past
the final will again be 5 1/2 per cent &mdash; anything more would please
has now passed its worst.
Chemicals Prosperity
Better profits are expected from Associated Chemical
rapidly in recent years and is now a sizeable group controlling assets
Last year's total distribution of 15 p.c. came from earnings
of 38 p.c. so an increase is well within the company's powers
especially as the cash position is good. On the other hand the
directors may be conservative again because of expansion plans.
day with reserves and undistributed profits now totalling nearly &pound;4
million by comparison with an issued equity capital of &pound;2,154,000.
manufacturers, dyers and printers of felts who now have considerable
interests in the carpet trades, are expected to be lower. This will
several years past the company has added a 6 1/2 p.c. tax free
distribution from capital profits to its dividend.
A year ago the balance sheet disclosed cash and investments
Two-thirds of the investments are in quoted stocks and some
shareholders have been pressing for a return of capital.
moves will be made to distribute some of the surplus cash resources.
The 5s. shares of Phoenix Assurance have risen about 30s.
this year and 50s. from the low point last year. This reflects
market hopes that there will at last be an increase on the 100
tiny scrip issue of one-for-20.
over 3 p.c. This is high by comparison with the 1 1/4 to 1 3/4
p.c. returns shown by such companies as Equity Law, General
Accident, Legal &amp; General and Eagle Star. But after the no
expect much.
start manufacturing within the Common Market. Already Inbucon, a
British firm of business consultants has been engaged by Finmeccanica,
part new British manufacturing ventures in Italy.
Government agency, the Institute for Industrial Reconstruction
(I.R.I.); which has majority shareholdings in a large number of
No Future For Small Atomic Reactors?
proposition.
JONES compares life in the two competing super-Powers and the
TO say that it is nice to be home, after four months and
seven thousand miles of travel in America and Russia, is true in more
than one way. Appreciation of living in England, now amply
reinforced, is the least of it. The greatest relief is not to be at
Whether we call it cold war or peaceful competition, the contest
between the two super-Powers is a burden of which they will never be
free in what we can discern of the future. The material weight of
rest of the world to stop bothering them.
of space is either a silly game or a glorious endeavour of the human
Teacher's view of space flights
For Americans, Russia's lead in the race is as grim a matter as
Japan's initiative after Pearl Harbour. Of the possible reactions,
been (not might have been) fabricated. A mother, sensible enough
to believe in them, asked me what she should say to her child after
the teacher had told the class they were a fake. Tell her what you
hard as for an atheist parent to challenge religious instruction.
things. Ours, said a young teacher, is a democratic space
have a man on the moon in six months if we just shot them off
None of these people was excited by the thought of an American in
starving, said an economics student at Cleveland. But he added:
I guess we've got to do it.
For the Russians, who enjoy the lead, one might expect it to be
an inspiration. For some of them, it is. A woman pulling potatoes on
An engineer: It's not the right way to use millions of
roubles, with conditions as they are. A miner's wife: It won't
do any harm, if we can believe it's for peaceful purposes, but it
We don't say this publicly, you understand, but most of us think
thought the space flights justified. He shrugged: Might do one
good thing &mdash; prove once and for all there's no God up there.
Russian people want war, but it is true. With the Russians, it is a
Can you imagine that we would start a war? It is impossible to
With the Americans, there are several strands. They have a great
deal to lose. They have, even now, a deep suspicion of militarism, of
ornithologist, asked how he came to choose his profession, explained:
After I graduated I was in chemistry, but I found they were using
it for war. I switched to electronics, and it was the same. I sat
down to figure out what they couldn't use for war, and what I came up
The evening after the President's July 25 speech, announcing a
readiness to fight for Berlin and an increase in the call-up &mdash; a
speech which caused more alarm over interrupted careers than
satisfaction &mdash; I chatted over a coffee with a factory worker. He was
in the White House now. Never was any need to fight in Korea, and if
he was around we'd be fighting in Germany now.
But, sad to relate, they want peace is not the whole story.
One has to add that both Americans and Russians are ready to
awareness of what nuclear war would mean.
Union Square in New York is a public forum, comparable to
Speakers' Corner in Hyde Park. As a listening-post, it is more
with something on his mind starts to talk, and those around him join
You gotta admit, a young man was saying as I neared a
sizeable group, that things advance when there's a war. We got
Hiroshima? The first speaker countered: Aw, Hiroshima &mdash; did you
ever see a man mangled by a bus?
for real estate. They kick it around for a bit, then they divide it
always will be wars, it don't matter how much you talk. I broke in
to ask if anyone disagreed with this proposition. Among about fifty
people, nobody did.
Lecture on need for disarmament
language from a nuclear disarmer. The very intensity of past
Once, a man who had experienced Nazi occupation told me how the
Germans knocked people about and turned them out of their homes to
again. I said: One thing that's certain is that you won't.
Gaulle, the Soviet Premier had declared that France would be
Americans' inborn optimism
I said that Khrushchev was quite right about France, and
Britain, too, but unduly sanguine about his own country. Nuclear
weapons, I went on, could destroy the human race. Signalling to the
positively: Not the Soviet Union.
could cease to function as an organised society. Paradoxically, the
would be saved. With their inborn optimism, many Americans envisage
the aftermath of nuclear attack as a period of getting back on their
feet, like the day after a hurricane.
known long-range bombing. The blitz on London was a frustrated
were devastated by street-fighting, but Moscow &mdash; with the Germans
almost in the suburbs &mdash; never had an air raid on the London scale, and
Russians do, of course, know about nuclear bombs and missiles.
have been told very little about fallout. Defence, therefore, means
defence for them.
Views that go unchallenged
To this, one has to add the general conviction that our
call the German question and Americans the Berlin crisis. The view
unreasonably attacked by the Soviet Union is seldom publicly
necessary, the mood is not far on either side from: We don't
want to fight, but by jingo if we do...
thinking of everyday speech as well as official statements) must
include these entries: Threat: a bellicose move made by our
opponents. Warning: a bellicose move made by us. I have met both
Americans and Russians who were genuinely saddened by the resumption
of nuclear tests, which was in the offing while I was in America and
One might sum up by recording two posters in the same street in
Kiev. The first showed a mother clutching a child and read: For
their sake, we must have peace. The other showed a steel-helmeted
the Motherland. I feel sure that both meet with general approval.
there is a refreshing absence of the undiscriminating hatred known in
This is easy for the Americans. They reason that, since one can
be loyal to America and oppose Kennedy, one can be fond of Russia
while loathing Khrushchev. There is in fact a certain vogue for
Russia in the United States. Far more young people are learning the
Russian language than in Britain, and they are not all hoping for jobs
A.E.U. National Committee's Demand May Cost &pound;30 Million
Revised Pay Basis Claim
at Eastbourne today passed a resolution reaffirming the demand for a
million workers.
It also asked for a revision of holiday pay to be based on
time workers.
collar workers, including draughtsmen, who were winning the day in
He thought Britain was lagging behind many on the Continent who
WORK STRAIN
Mr. W. J. Daniel (Worcester) urged that it was vitally
necessary to have longer breaks from work because of the stress and
strain of modern industry, he declared.
I think we can get the British Medical Association and
revitalised the workers' energy. Under automation work was getting
NEW GRADE
Mr. W. J. Carron (President) pointed out that in some
increased holidays had been agreed based on length of service and
other qualifications.
There had also been an extension of a new grade known as manual
Short-time Figures Slashed in Car Factories
figures issued after today's monthly meeting of the Midland Regional
Board for Industry.
Major C. R. Dibben, chairman of the board, told a Press
conference, that most workers in the industry were now back to a full
working week. Although the revival in car sales appears to be
have continued, there is hope in the industry that the success of
A greater awareness of the need for exports by Midland
manufacturers was reported by Mr. C. J. Holman, regional
director of the Board of Trade. As a result of the Government's
export campaign, inquiries to the Board's Birmingham offices from
firms had increased by 55 per cent. They came from about 600 firms
all over the Midlands.
was recommended by the regional board after hearing views of members.
Motor Exports Down in First Quarter
CAR exports for the first quarter of this year at 85,219,
It was 5,000 below the figure for the final quarter of 1960 and
Car output for the quarter, at 218,003, was well below any
quarterly figure for 1959 and 1960.
and production, at 119,745, were both well above corresponding figures
Questioned &mdash; Page 6.)
First Shots in Revolt
of Mers \el Kebir, near Oran, western Algeria.
According to official sources quoted by the French agency a
base.
Unconfirmed reports said troops and Marines resisted the attack
and the paratroops withdrew soon afterwards.
Two battalions of French motorised infantry were reported to have
crossed the Rhine into France today, as the Armed Forces Ministry
announced the recall of troops and armour from the 60,000 strong force
in Germany to strengthen the Paris area.
Food Rush
and the 16th Infantry Division put on a war footing.
A message from President De Gaulle will be read to the French
National Assembly and Senate this afternoon.
The French Grocers' Federation appealed to people today not to
Soviet Foreign Ministers), for a cease-fire in Laos.
welcome the Royal Laotian Government's acceptance of the cease-fire
appeal to the notice of the Left-wing Pathet Lao forces.
A MOVE to enable alcoholic drinks to be sold to passengers in
Mr. William Clark, Conservative M.P. for Nottingham
South, proposed a new clause to the Government's Licensing Bill so
that such drinks could be permitted.
long-distance coach in this country, you can softly drink, but you
Mr. Marcus Lipton (Lab., Brixton) said he supported the new
clause but he would not like to see 24 hours drinking going on &mdash;
combined cruising and boozing while enjoying the beauties of the
countryside.
Public Concern
Mr. Dennis Vosper, Minister of State, Home Office, said there
private coach and fill up the boot with beer cases. People come down
of the Army, Navy, Air Force and Home Guards.
The units were ordered to report for duty immediately. The Prime
The estate strike yesterday morning was aimed at this and
economic harm to the country, she declared.
Mrs. Bandaranaike called upon all patriotic Ceylonese to give
By a proclamation last night, the death penalty for looting and
arson, and other punishment for offences such as the breaking of
bridges, obstruction to roads and damage to buses and trains was
London Jew Faces Eichmann After 23 Years
A BRITISH estate agent, Mr. Moliz Fleischmann, of St.
John's Wood, London, told the court trying Adolf Eichmann, today, of
in the Gestapo's Vienna headquarters.
born, escaped on one of the last trains out of the city before the
outbreak of war.
He told us his task was to purify Vienna and Austria from Jews
Eichmann. The witness box from which he spoke is directly opposite
Mr. Fleischmann.
Part of Mr. Fleischmann's testimony added to the mystery of
Eichmann's birth. He said that at the Vienna interview Eichmann told
him: I speak Hebrew and Yiddish fluently because I was born in
Sharona (a German community near Tel Aviv, Israel).
born at Solingen, Germany, and cannot understand how the idea got
Protest Over Berkswell Footpaths
all used by visitors, ramblers and residents in the areas, should not
Asking for closure orders, British Railways say the footpaths
cross railway lines and will be affected by the Coventry-Birmingham
Berkswell Parish Council strongly opposes any proposal to close
the footpath which runs from the south of Truggist Lane, crossing the
ASSOCIATION'S EVIDENCE
linking the southern part of the parish with the village and the
The association provided evidence to prove that paths which
linked Kenilworth Road with Wootton Lane and Bradnocks Marsh Lane were
The closing of a fourth footpath, connecting Old Station Road
COVENTRY and Leamington members of the Midlands Womens'
Sutton Coldfield yesterday were told that the new Licensing Bill would
bring more protection from teenage drinkers as well as more competition.
Nearly 400 wives and relatives of licensees belonging to the
association were at the rally. They are responsible for a great deal
of charity work, both nationally and in the licensed trade.
the National Trade Development Association, a body which helps to
the new Bill the penalty for under-age drinkers would go up from &pound;2
I hope that will choke off some of them from their games and
that the country must go Continental and give drink licenses to
restaurants and boarding houses. For better or for worse this would
bring competition to the licensed trade.
They turned out to see Jacqueline, say surprised police
200,000 PARISIANS GO WILD OVER KENNEDY
Confetti welcome in Rue \de Rivoli
and crowds estimated at 200,000 cheered them on their drive from Orly
Airport.
President \de Gaulle sat beside Mr. Kennedy in an open car as
the American leader &mdash; 26 years his junior &mdash; stood up to acknowledge
the cheers, flag-waving and hand-clapping of the crowds. Surprised
police said there were more people in the streets than for
As soon as the official motorcade entered the city limits a
reached the Quai \d'Orsay, the French Foreign Ministry, where he will
stay until Saturday morning.
Mr. and Mrs. Kennedy received a particularly hearty welcome
from students outside the Sorbonne University &mdash; where Mrs. Kennedy
Confetti was showered down the Rue \de Rivoli, where Parisians
thronged office windows as well as pavements.
At the airport, Mr. Kennedy praised his host as a captain in
his leadership and sense of history were needed more than ever today.
It was Mrs. Kennedy who drew the crowds, said police.
enclosed car, waving and smiling.
MEETING
since he took office.
The first meeting between the Presidents lasted 40 minutes.
five meetings over the next three days, two hours after Mr. Kennedy
flew in.
General \de Gaulle greeted Mr. Kennedy on the steps of the
Elysee Palace and Republican Guards gave full military honours.
Of his planned three-day discussions with President \de Gaulle,
Mr. Kennedy said: I have neither held nor planned any talks that
are more important.
He added: I am here to pay tribute to France, not for her past
glory but for her present greatness &mdash; her leadership in Europe and
Africa, in science and industry, the productivity of her workers, the
known Americans here other than as friends and allies, and as such we
welcome you.
THOUSANDS of South Africans, citizens of a republic since
procession to the Groote Kerk Church in Pretoria, where he took the
Representatives of all sections of the population had places in
the church to witness the President's inauguration ceremony.
They included Africans, Coloureds (mixed race), Indians and
Paramount Chief of the Zulus, Cyprian Dinizulu.
front and behind.
The crowd, six deep in places, cheered him enthusiastically.
Many had waited since 6 a.m. in the rain, and the square was a
sea of umbrellas.
11-gun salute
that went back 155 years.
to decide its own domestic policy without interference from
courtesy, friendliness and graciousness, and said he hoped for
Mr. Kruschev arrived today in Czechoslovakia on his way to
agency Tass reported.
Tass did not name the town in Czechoslovakia where the Soviet
Prime Minister had arrived. Mr. Kruschev left Kiev, in the Ukraine,
Conservatives put their man in at hectic meeting
By MICHAEL PICKERING
CONSERVATIVE Councillor Bob Henderson was elected chairman of
position for only one meeting.
fought to keep control of the chair.
strength with five members present.
chair at the beginning of the meeting during the election of chairman
Lewcock, Coun. A. P. Gurd, and Ald. R. W. Hanlan.
chairman. He is at present on holiday in Paris, and was vice-chairman
The Conservatives voted against.
Coun. Gurd then proposed Coun. Mrs. Lewcock as chairman for
Coun. Bob Henderson then proposed Ald. John Burton, the
Coun. Bob Henderson and the Tories voted him into the chair by five
votes to three.
Coun. Henderson will remain chairman only for today's meeting,
put matters right.
Councillor accuses Labour paper
news sheet published at the time of the municipal elections.
Mary Magdalen home for old people.
The home was built by the Schools and Charities Committee with
homes such as the Mary Magdalen homes.
Welfare Committee would complete two new homes for the elderly during
I challenged this statement at this week's meeting of the
that neither of the new homes would be open until next year.
COMIC-STRIP PARIS SEND-OFF
Smiles, handshake as K. and K. meet
As they grasped hands at the top of the nine stone steps leading
him if it would be all right to shake hands again for the
photographers.
Then they went inside to the white-walled music room to begin
As President Kennedy drove from the airport, people stood and
cheered in the rain.
Some carried banners reading Help Berlin. One said:
Give him hell, Jack.
COMIC STRIP
A series of comic-strip mishaps frustrated President Kennedy's
attempts to leave Paris. Eventually his aircraft took off &mdash; a quarter
First the CAR carrying Mr. Dean Rusk, Secretary of State,
another one was produced, but the party was ten minutes late reaching
the airport.
Then just as the Presidential jet was about to taxi on to the
of NEWSPAPERS was also thrown aboard.
He was breathlessly followed by Providencia, Mrs. Kennedy's
THE MAID
No sooner was Providencia on board than yet another late-comer
Kennedy's SOCIAL SECRETARY, Miss Letitia Baldridge.
under way for Vienna.
There were cries of ~Goodbye Jackie and ~Goodbye Madame
as Mrs. Kennedy, wearing a light blue woollen overcoat, a white
Maurice Couve \de Murville, Foreign Minister, and the Austrian
Ambassador, Herr Adria Rotter.
MR. MACMILLAN and President Kennedy today considered the
With Summit diplomacy revived in a spectacular fashion by the
Vienna meeting with Mr. Kruschev, the President considered with the
extended their meeting to consider fully Mr. Kruschev's tough
attitude on several major questions at the Vienna meeting.
The Russians are said to be taking up a tougher attitude on many
ARRIVED EARLY
in Laos.
to answer the question: Does the Vienna meeting, with its vague
goodwill, but no practical results, justify further steps along the
The President also reported on Mr. Kruschev's attitude to
was unyielding on these two issues.
It is understood that Mr. Macmillan also questioned the
the common market.
on their talks.
Tonight the Kennedys will go to Buckingham Palace for dinner with
the Queen and the Duke of Edinburgh.
WATER GUNS HOSE BERLINERS ON BORDER
U.S. troops threatened in a second incident
Berliners standing within 100yds. of the border, on the Western
side, West Berlin police reported.
The East German Interior Ministry on Tuesday told West
Berliners to keep 100yds. from the borders. The Western
described this as effrontery.
demarcation line to withdraw, and when the Americans did not move a
water cannon lorry drove up on the East Berlin side, a West German
News Agency reported. But after a while the water hose was withdrawn
with the Americans still in position.
Winds blew the tear gas back across the border and someone in the
crowd threw one of the grenades back, a police spokesman said.
Showing flag
to-day stood guard along the city's dividing line.
The troops took station yesterday along the city sector boundary
after the East German Government introduced stringent new regulations
for passage from one half of the city to the other.
They remained on guard all night, and to-day British forces, with
tanks and armoured cars, took part in their second show-the-flag
exercise in three days.
The Dutch and Swedish consulates in Berlin said to-day they had
received reports that foreign residents in East Germany were having
In East Berlin, Foreign Ministry officials said they had not
heard of any new regulations banning foreigners from going to West
Offices shut
Britain that ~Whitehall is playing a dangerous game with fire across
a powder magazine over the Berlin issue.
catastrophe in which Britain, too, would be involved, said the
THREAT TO AIR CORRIDOR SERIOUS
spokesman in London to-day.
He had been asked about the Berlin air corridors which, it is
understood, are referred to in the new Soviet Note on the Berlin
Note itself.
diplomatic correspondent.
The full text of the Note was received by the Foreign Office
to-day from the British Embassy in Moscow. Similar Notes have been
The Notes are being studied by the three Western powers and will
also be discussed by the ambassadorial steering group in Washington,
According to the Soviet news agency Tass &mdash; quoted by Reuter &mdash; the
air corridors to West Berlin for subversive and revenge-seeking aims
the three Western powers, on a temporary basis, to ensure the needs of
purposes of West German militarism.
Russia insisted that the Western powers take immediate measures
German Republic in West Berlin.
Tension in Berlin soared again to-day with angry protests over
travel restrictions imposed by the East Germans and a threat by the
conference on the Gleneagles golf course and said he thought no-one
would fight over Berlin, and Mr. Khrushchev was quoted as saying
that he was willing to talk over the difficulties.
concerned the issuing of permits for West Berliners wishing to travel
The Western Commandants authorised the City Government to take
Angry West Berliners, shouting, ~Get out, you pigs,
gathered outside the Zoo railway station to-day after the East German
Finally the office was shut, along with a similar office at
Westkureuz Station.
The U.S. Commandant in Berlin has made an oral protest to
East German authorities in recent days and incidents arising
The 1st Battalion the Welch Regiment  increased patrols
Germany to-day to counter increased East German activity on the other
Mr. Macmillan, who is holidaying in Scotland, spoke to
reporters on the 18th fairway of the golf course. He declared:
I think there would be much more danger of war if weapons
were not so destructive. Fifty years ago we could have had a war.
Now it is not much fun for anybody.
going on is very worrying, but nothing more.
To-morrow Mr. Macmillan is to discuss the Berlin situation with
Lord Home, the Foreign Secretary, at Gleneagles. It was learned
Elizabeth the Queen Mother at Birkhall.
In Copenhagen, Drew Pearson, syndicated American newspaper
URGENT MATTER, SAY CHEADLE R.D.C.
against the proposal to close part of the Caldon Canal between
Area Planning Officer, Mr. B. Skelland, that it was planned
eventually to reintegrate that section of the canal with the
Yesterday the committee were informed that the proposal to close
Inland Waterways Redevelopment Advisory Committee.
In a letter, the Inland Waterways Protection Society told the
committee that in the case of each threatened canal, they carried out
an inspection of every yard of the waterway and eventually submitted a
were one further step towards the elimination of the inland
waterways.
The society pointed out that the present capital value of the
Caldon Canal was in the region of &pound;20 millions.
It was also reported that the Service of Youth Scheme and
Kingsley and Ipstones Parish Council were unanimously opposed to the
proposed closure of the canal.
The Froghall firm of Thomas Bolton and Sons Ltd., said they
Another firm affected by the proposed closure, W. Podmore and
that any extraction of water would seriously affect their interests.
Brittains Ltd., of Cheddleton Paper Mills, said their own use
of the canal had diminished over the years, and if the time came for
recommended that the council should protest most strongly against the
closure. He pointed out that the council were not in a position to
Mr. T. P. Brindley suggested that firms taking water
Instead of thinking of closing the canal, he said, steps should be
to its full industrial use, particularly as the railway was now closed
would be better spent in cleaning it up and making it usable again.
BERLIN PUTS BLANKET ON BOMB TALKS
British effort at Geneva
the Geneva conference on the banning of nuclear tests, which started
optimistic in the present climate.
Former Minister of State for Foreign Affairs, he added: But
these negotiations.
with the Soviet Union at the present time.
I do not say it has eliminated any hope of settlement, but
clearly the Soviet Union do not appear at the moment to be very
Asked if the deadlock was likely to continue in the talks, he
Mr. Tsarapkin (the Russian delegate) has brought back with him from
In the talks, the West were making yet another determined bid to
try to get a nuclear test ban treaty with Russia.
instructions from President Kennedy to make the maximum effort to
the Soviet Troika proposal, demanding that the International
Control Organisation, which would police a test ban, should be
headed by three administrators &mdash; one each from the Communist, Western
and neutral groups &mdash; instead of one.
Fears attack on Cuban Government
With events in Brazil leading to fears of anarchy, Dr. Fidel
Castro to-day urged the country to make use of the experience of
CLR. BROOK BECOMES HUDDERSFIELD'S 61st MAYOR
CLR. HARRY FRANCE BROOK became Huddersfield's sixty-first
Town Council this afternoon.
Ward since 1944. He is chairman of directors and founder of the firm
of Messrs. H. F. Brook and Co. Ltd., woollen merchants and
W. Nicholson, is the new Mayoress.
More than 1,500 flowers and potted plants, delicately arranged by
and Mrs. Day are to serve as the Deputy Mayor and Mayoress.
Clr. A. J. Hazelden, moving the resolution to elect Clr.
Brook, said: The name of Brook has for scores of years been
associated with Huddersfield, and for nearly the lifetime of the
member of this Council.
Our new Mayor will be the fifth of that name in the long
stream &mdash; was appropriate having regard to the number of Brooks
who had served the Council today and in the past. The second
meaning &mdash; to suffer insult or injury &mdash; would, they all sincerely
Clr. Brook began his education in two of the local schools.
he (Clr. Hazelden) understood that in the world of sport,
particularly, the new Mayor had shown considerable ability as a
His work on the Council over the many years of his service had
been outstanding in more than one respect.
degree, said Clr. Hazelden.
Clr. Hazelden went on to refer to the various committees on
which Clr. Brook served &mdash; including the Children's Committee, of
which he was Chairman, the Watch Committee of which he was also
Chairman, and the Mental Health Sub-Committee of the Health Committee.
All of us know the remarks made about the Watch Committee &mdash;
The source of law and order is not always very popular, but is
still very essential, and Clr. Brook, the chairman, has a knowledge
of police administration not only locally but nationally, for he was a
member of the Police Committee of the Association of Municipal
Corporations and a representative on the Police Training College
Board.
Clr. Brook saw to it that certain minimum standards were
conformed with and no-one could deny his fairness. His views,
although not accepted, are in accordance with the earnest desire &mdash; be
it in the civic field of duty or on the field of sport &mdash; to play the
The new civic year could be a momentous one for Huddersfield.
It might well be that the foundations of the new Huddersfield
would be laid, and never before had such tremendous innovations and
plans for the future been contemplated.
Not only were the Council there to acknowledge the new Mayor,
said Clr. Hazelden, but for the second time in Huddersfield's long
Clr. Hazelden's election motion was supported by Clrs. Mrs.
R. Townsend and C. C. Hoyle.
Clr. Mrs. Townsend said that people should be grateful that
physical and moral stamina. The year of office was filled to capacity
everyone not only by their ability but by their strength of character
and sincerity of thought.
Clr. Brook possessed those qualities in high degree. Here is
robes, and after taking the oath of office, the new Mayor thanked the
Council for the honour they had accorded to him. He was very proud to
affection. He was proud of Huddersfield's name in municipal
good, I have little patience with he who praises with enthusiastic
tone all centuries but this, and every town but his own.
citizens. It was true to say of everyone entering local government &mdash;
not least a mayor &mdash; that he or she became a visionary.
More delectable place
After listing the various developments the Mayor said that all
these were necessary schemes that could only be carried out at cost
and some inconvenience. It was important, therefore, that they should
that a task should be done efficiently, but that it must also be done
impressive the achievement, and however faultless the organisation.
duties of Mayoress, Clr. Brook stressed the point that she would
seek to combine her official duties with those of having to run a home
working hours would not be too great.
He concluded: I am very conscious of the confidence you have
Clr. Thackray said that their warmest thanks were due to Ald.
and Mrs. Day, who had not spared themselves in carrying out their
Ald. Day had lost no opportunity of selling Huddersfield
had presided efficiently over Council meetings.
from his employers, Messrs. Thomas Broadbent and Sons Ltd.,
engineers, which had enabled him to perform all his Mayoral duties.
(Clr. Schofield) had been on the Council. He praised the valuable
work Ald. Day had done during his long association with that
committee.
People made us feel at home
of a large and united family.
The people of Huddersfield, of all ages, classes, creeds and
look back with very happy memories on the year which is now
passing.
in the town demolished and derelict sites made more presentable.
lifetime, he told the Council.
I think it can truly be said that Huddersfield is
experiencing the biggest face-lift in its history, and the boom
for a long time to come.
the Town Clerk (Mr. H. Bann), the Mayor's Secretary (Mr. W.
Stoney) and other Corporation officials for their assistance.
abstain from voting on the matter of the elevation to the aldermanic
bench of two former members defeated at the polls in the recent
Municipal Elections.
In addition to the Mayor, the two defeated councillors at the
elections &mdash; Mr. Clifford Stephenson (Lib.) and Mr. F. W.
Fielding (Con.) &mdash; had been nominated as new aldermen to fill the
Aldermen J. F. C. Cole, J. T. Gee, H. A. Bennie
ward.
News of Labour's abstention came in a statement to The
Examiner by Clr. Reginald Hartley, leader of the Labour group on
the Council, before he went into the annual meeting. He and his
proposals, but would not support the election of Messrs. Stephenson
The statement read:
election of persons to the office of alderman from outside the elected
and that in fact such elections have been made from time to time by
all parties in various towns and cities of this country. Nevertheless
Indeed, we had every reason to believe that this principle would
made from outside elected representatives, this should only be done by
We therefore feel that by the nominations on this occasion both
Liberal and Conservative Parties have violated the spirit of such
agreement in addition to the principle of democratic election by the
Therefore on this occasion we intend to support the election of
the nominees of the Liberal and Conservative parties who are members
at the time of election but we shall refrain from supporting the two
nominees who are not members of this authority.
THE Dominican Government announced today it had taken into
together with a priest accused of harbouring him on the night of the
The suspect was identified as Huascar Tejeda Reina and his
the chief assassin, and at least four alleged accomplices &mdash; his
brothers Rafel and Antonio and two friends, Amado Garcia Guerrero and
Police said Tejeda admitted he was at the priest's house on the
night of the killing, but denied any part in the murder. Father
Maduro has denied harbouring Tejeda.
Gen. Rafael, had taken up the reins of power his father held for
more than 30 years.
U.S. will oppose aggression &mdash; Kennedy
determined to oppose any aggression, whatever its strength and
nuclear weapons had made the United States vulnerable.
than any city in Europe has been in the past.
Berlin
with Mr. Kruschev in Vienna this weekend.
Mr. Kennedy said he and General \de Gaulle were agreed it was
Soviet Union and her associates.
participate in the Laos conference as long as there was any hope of
reaching a solution.
Mr. Kruschev left Bratislava today by train for Vienna for his
meeting with President Kennedy.
THE Prime Minister has now almost completed plans for a
considerable reshuffle in the middle ranks of the Government &mdash; and
expected.
The changes follow the appointment of Mr. David Ormesby-Gore as
British Ambassador in Washington.
PLUM JOBS
Macmillan has already decided on the appointments.
Sir Edward Boyle, Financial Secretary to the Treasury, is
K. meets K. round a coffee table in Vienna
table in a small cosily-furnished Vienna music room today for talks on
East-West issues which may shape the destinies of millions of people
months, met Mr. Kruschev, who at 67, has wielded supreme power in
the Soviet Union for four years.
outskirts of the city shortly after President Kennedy flew in from
Mrs. Kruschev is also in Vienna &mdash; she spent some time this
morning at an art gallery.
although both have made clear there will be no negotiations.
make personal contact with Mr. Kennedy and to discuss the main
issues in Soviet-American relations.
conferences &mdash; on Laos and on a nuclear weapons test ban treaty.
LONDON gave President Kennedy another big hand to-day when he
For his part, the President was in genial form (left).
The enthusiasm was renewed when he later went to Admiralty House
KENNEDY, MAC LOOK AHEAD TO NEW SUMMIT
MR. MACMILLAN and President Kennedy today considered the next
steps towards a full summit conference of the major Powers.
The Summit diplomacy revived in a spectacular fashion by the
Vienna meeting with Mr. Kruschev. President Kennedy considered with
Mr. Macmillan the chances of a meeting of the Big Four soon.
This was the highlight of a two-hour review of East-West
House. From this first floor room overlooking Whitehall they could
and other guests for lunch.
normally used by the First Lord of the Admiralty &mdash; the Prime Minister
to the opulent surroundings in which the President met Mr. Kruschev
The President surprised the Prime Minister's staff by arriving
10 minutes early for the talks.
Behind the spectacle of the cheering crowds in the sunshine
there were a number of queries hanging over President Kennedy's report
In their man-to-man exchanges they considered the future policy
U.S. are reported &mdash; and the situation in Laos and Mr.
good-will but no practical results, justify further steps along the
President Kennedy also reported on Mr. Kruschev's attitude to
nuclear testing and disarmament. All reports are that Mr. Kruschev
was unyielding on these issues.
It is understood that Mr. Macmillan also questioned the
President on his earlier talks with President \de Gaulle. This
meeting may have a crucial bearing on Britain's possible entry into
Selwyn Lloyd, and the new British Ambassador to the United States,
Tonight President and Mrs. Kennedy go to Buckingham Palace for
dinner with the Queen and Duke of Edinburgh.
encouraging in his view of the Kennedy-Kruschev weekend talks,
MAC KEEPS SILENT ON TALKS WITH KENNEDY
in the Commons this afternoon on his talks with President Kennedy
not be private.
for me to make a detailed statement on the specific points raised.
The British and U.S. administrations are in constant touch
to the whole House?
There was laughter when the Prime Minister replied:
WORTLEY PUT THEIR CASE AGAINST CITY TAKEOVER
Government Commission in London to discuss the proposals of other
authorities affecting the rural district.
40 per cent and the rateable value by more than 22 per cent.
3,600 HOUSES
to extend their boundaries to take in part of the Ecclesfield and
If successful, they would take into the city more than 3,000
houses which they have built in the Parson Cross area, and more than
600 Wortley council houses, as well as eight schools, a clinic and two
Wortley Council have offered to buy all Sheffield Corporation
houses built in the rural district and to administer them as part of
Concerning Bradfield parish, Sheffield proposes substantial
Corporation housing at Stannington adjoining existing development,
partly private and partly the Rural Council's.
Rotherham Corporation are seeking to take into their boundary
that part of Thorpe Hesley which is in Wortley district.
local government re-organisation in the Barnsley area have agreed to
They are Penistone Rural and Dodworth and Penistone Urban
The scheme will probably be put forward by the West Riding County
Commission in London next month. The four districts have a combined
population of about 30,000.
BRITAIN HITS BACK AS MR K ACCUSES
Reds turn on the heat over Berlin
By JOSEPH TOBIN
latest attempt to stir up an international crisis over West Berlin.
complaint that W. Berlin is being used for the organisation of
international provocations endangering peace.
The Foreign Secretary, Lord Home, is preparing his reply to
Russia's complaint. The terms of the reply are expected to be
and a session next week of the Federal Parliament's upper house there.
REJECTED
The West German President, Herr Luebke, today rejected the
The Russians have protested to the United States, France, and
Britain at unlawful meetings of the West German Parliamentary
I understand that the Foreign Secretary will say in his reply
against the four-Power status of the city.
He will remind Mr. Kruschev that similar meetings have been
Berlin with the Soviet leader as most sombre observers were
surprised today that Russia should raise the Berlin issue with the
Western powers so quickly after the Vienna meeting.
Meanwhile, Western delegates fear that Mr. Andrei Gromyko,
By OLD ROWLEY
ante-post favourite for the Derby.
a great deal wiser as to his ability. The gallop took place over a
length behind his workmates, who were galloping in line abreast. Then
run up to them. Pinturischio responded instantaneously and shot up to
them, only to be steadied again. The manner in which he accelerated
when given the office was that of a high-class horse, and
year.
Whatever Pinturischio has been asked to do to date, he has
accomplished in effortless style, and his future is obviously
calculations on the Derby.
Long Stride
during his first season in training, he is most unlikely to be
or early June of the following year, and it is a number of years now
since a horse that embarked upon its three-year-old career unraced has
debut in the Wood Ditton Stakes.
The foregoing precedent need not prejudice our assessment of
Pinturischio's prospects unduly, as there are extenuating
circumstances in his case.
seven furlong spins with more forward companions. Such was his
progress during those Autumn months that Noel Murless had intended to
the going came up heavy and the project was abandoned.
Stern Opposition
Although the Wood Ditton Stakes is confined to three-year-olds
that have never run at starting, the opposition is likely to be stern
enough to test Pinturischio.
morning he was not disgraced in a seven furlong gallop with Test Case,
stable's Derby horse Test Case, but he fared well enough in the
The morning of the day in which Harry Carr met with his
accident at Lincoln, he rode Sagacity in a six furlong gallop with
couple of lengths behind the others from start to finish in this spin,
and considering that the trip was too sharp for such a big horse as
meet next Thursday.
An Omen
him to lay a solid foundation to his claims to be considered the Derby
winner by scoring on the first occasion he faces the racecourse's acid
a shepherd boy, who committed suicide after losing his master's sheep
the superstitious say it is an omen that a Newmarket horse will win
about Test Case. He proved he was a good horse by winning three of
Furthermore Pinturischio is not the only string to Murless's
powerful bow. Golden Voice, Hunter's Song, Aurelius and So Cozy are
all very nice colts with the scope to train on into fancied Derby
candidates. I suspect that Lester Piggott has a particularly soft
Great Promise
The only time that Aurelius ran last year, he showed great
promise by running on well to take fourth place behind Beta, Dual and
As he has done so well in his recent work he is more than likely
to make a successful reappearance in the Craven Stakes, run over a
Alternatively Murless's interests could be represented by
either Magnificat or So Cozy in that event, but as it is Aurelius's
only engagement of the week it seems likely that he will run.
expected to wait for the Free Handicap on Wednesday, when Prince Tudor
fast to run Morgan to half a length in the Coventry Stakes, at Kempton
Smuggler's Joy or Pardao will be easy to beat.
upsides Test Case, while Pardao shaped well in the work with Sagacity
an indirect compliment by Good Old Days having run Dual to a neck in
the 2,000 Guineas Trial Stakes at Kempton Park.
perfect next week. By the end of it we should be in a far better
position to anticipate the outcome of both the 2,000 Guineas and the
Derby.
Today's Nap
Without Doug Smith having to bring pressure to bear, Crown
Imperial ran on well to finish third to the older horse Prince Chamier
before Easter. Since then the colt has been noted moving very
smoothly in all his work.
Cingle, who is under orders for the Round Tower Handicap
(3-30), is expected to become Jack Langley's first winner since he
took charge of Mr. W. J. Weston-Evans' horses at Herringswell
Manor.
occasions that he has led work for the classic horse Prince Tudor.
Welsh Rake and Bass Rock covered five furlongs at a sharp pace,
employed.
five furlongs, these being Felix, with Menelek and Court Imperial.
their teams exercise on the Railway Land.
furlongs. Other teams seen on these training grounds were those of
G. Barling, H. Cottrill, Reg Day and John Waugh, where work was
confined to cantering.
Nightingall May Have a Double
which may be initiated by Duke Toledo in the Round Tower Handicap
(3-30) and completed by King's Probity, who goes for the Hatch Bridge
Handicap (4-30).
Duke Toledo demonstrated that he is an early-season performer
and Martian, a winner at Hurst Park on Wednesday.
Following this victory, Walter Nightingall ran the colt at the
Epsom Spring Meeting where he was defeated by his burden of 9st.
Ascot's Queen Anne Stakes. He had only one other outing, at Kempton
Park in soft going, which was probably the cause of his poor showing.
If Duke Toledo reproduces his form of 12 months ago he should
The three-year-old, King's Probity, was a most consistent
juvenile, never being out of the first four in six attempts. He lost
his maiden allowance at Brighton in September, when he easily beat
Dolaucothi and should be ready to do the trick here.
to give King's Probity most trouble, as he wound up a promising
two-year-old career with a win at Yarmouth, but Nightingall's charge
may just have the edge.
Cost 6,500gns.
seem to be more backward this year, but the stable can get off the
mark in the Cannon Yard Plate (3-0) with Red Imp, a 1,050 guineas
Magic Red colt, who is preferred to Jackie Sirett's Baba.
Another winner for Ingham may well be Mr. Bernard Sunley's
Raincourt, who was one of the highest priced yearlings of 1959,
costing 6,500 guineas.
during the closing stages behind Blue Sash at Headquarters in
September. This experience should be enough to give Raincourt victory
in the Bardolph Plate (4-0).
her liking and is fancied to beat Harold Wallington's Hanbury Lad.
Prince Midge is Windsor Nap
prior to the 2,000 Guineas, returns to the scene of his solitary
success in four ventures last term at Windsor, where he is napped to
charges, and the Hurst Park winner Welsh Huntress, a galloping
companion of Prince Midge, gives a line to the well being of Mr.
THIS CRICKET RECORD IS TOO BAD
Pakistan are dreary
and in England top players and administrators are loud with pious
is happening to the first-class game in India.
In Amritsar, whose name in Sanskrit means pool of
immortality, Pakistan's cricketers have just taken a further step
other 12.
given to the game by the MCC committee charged with that task
climate could deliver a most damaging cold douche on all our good
took note of what is happening elsewhere in the Commonwealth of
Croydon today, but still glowing mentally, was MARTIN TURNER,
whose refereeing of the Barbarians v. Springboks game on Saturday
Cambridge Blue, was twice capped by England as a wing three-quarter in
his playing days. He has been refereeing for the six years since. He
was appointed to the County panel only this season.
Of Saturday's match, he told me: It was an awfully nice game
to handle. Too tough? Of course not. When you have 30 of the
world's best players on the field, it's got to be a hard game.
Baa-Baas rose to the occasion and were given full credit by the
South Africans, who are very nice fellows. It was the second time I
had refereed them. I was in charge of their game against Combined
Services on Boxing Day.
referee &mdash; I know I did when I played.
deputy professional at the Ashford Manor, Middlesex, club.
While her husband is away in South Africa &mdash; he plays in the South
sales slump.
Cup team.
find refreshing.
stop working, he says.
It is the kind of ambition many sportsmen shelve when they meet
with success.
If Huddersfield are knocked out in their FA Cup replay with
sidelines ready to make a bid.
This is no reflection on Chelsea's 17-year-old back ALAN
HARRIS.
enthusiastic type of player who would be a great help to our
Wilson earned a regular place in the England team last season,
a cartilage injury. He is 26, and would welcome a move to First
Division football.
If England and Fulham captain JOHNNY HAYNES is anxious to
team-mates, he might well take a look at the FA Book for Boys.
It contains an article by Fulham's JIMMY HILL, who was
art of captaining a soccer side.
But when I asked Hill today whether, in his capacity as chairman
of the Professional Footballers' Association, he was prepared to say
sometimes disgust when passes go astray, he refused.
Association members conform to the highest code of behaviour &mdash;
captains included.
Amateur golf championship to cost more this year
The amateur golf championship is to cost more &mdash; the entrance
Another shock for golfers is that only 250 (with handicaps of
three or better) will be allowed to compete. This restricted entry
will be enforced by a ballot, to be held on May 12.
Qualifying rounds, played in recent years, have been abandoned,
If you won the amateur title, where would you put the trophy?
The Royal and Ancient insist: The trophy shall be held by the club
from which the winner entered. And not, apparently, on your
DOWNES FIGHTS RODRIGUEZ
cruiser at Wembley on March 7 when he takes on the Californian
The 23-year-old Rodriguez who is a former Californian
cruiserweight champion, began boxing as a professional in 1956 and has
victories.
received in his unsuccessful world middleweight title fight with Paul
Millwall plan cuts &mdash; and no manager
By HAROLD PALMER
by Oldham. Hope of promotion is practically abandoned. New plans are
manager they sacked three weeks ago.
Chairman Micky Purser tells me he is preparing the new plan,
whatever the Football Combination decide Millwall will not field
No long journeys
would only need to have a dozen clubs to make the League
ARSENAL look like losing Scottish international Jackie
Southport &mdash; with the following week's Cup tie particularly in mind.
(outside-left) and Malcolm Lucas (wing-half) North today.
Richards is back
Richards was missing from the Aldershot team on Saturday for
the first time since he joined them last October. With his return
inside-rights for tonight's quarter-final in the Football League Cup
at Southampton (7.0).
George O'Brien received a leg injury on Saturday and is replaced by
JIMMY GREAVES HAS TWO AIMS
By BERNARD JOY
Before leaving for Liverpool for training with the England team
tonight, Chelsea inside-forward Jimmy Greaves told me: Barcelona?
future as well.
manager Ted Drake.
helping Chelsea to a respectable position in the table &mdash; and that is
the aim of every Chelsea player &mdash; and getting my own form back.
I have no intention of asking for a transfer. It is highly
determined to hold on to the prize of supremacy in Spain, and even
imported foreign stars &mdash; like Di Stefano, Kubala and Martinez.
Italian clubs have also made approaches for Greaves, although
they are barred from obtaining new players from abroad until after the
that a Barcelona representative was at the match. I would be
interested, of course, but I wouldn't be so hasty as a couple of
football.
that he wanted to leave Chelsea.
When I asked if his changed attitude meant that he was now happy,
club are having a bad time. You can't be happy under those
conditions.
Three on short list
The short list of three for the post of coach is Vic
Buckingham, the former West Bromwich manager and coach of Ajax, the
the Arsenal and Scotland wing-half. Roy Bentley, the Fulham and
former Chelsea player, is not in the list because Chelsea are looking
for a man with FA coaching qualifications.
Cup and League double in 1953-4. A former Spurs defender, he left
A big point in his favour is that he struck up a personal
Dave Dick is fined for 'chase error: Ragd falls
From PETER SCOTT: Fontwell Park, Monday
Fontwell Park this afternoon. He had two fancied mounts for Bryan
fence in the Horsham Handicap 'Chase.
Dick's fine was for carelessness in mistaking a plain fence in
Excavation Work Identifies Shrine Chapel
WALSINGHAM EVIDENCE
EXCAVATION of the small building on the north side of the
of Worcester in 1479.
The shrine, a small wooden building, was founded, according to
tradition, in A.D. 1061 &mdash; though historians have in general
established to guard the shrine.
Erasmus in 1511.
of his findings and on the date of the various buildings. These new
excavations, directed by the archaeological consultant to the Ministry
Remodelled
original Norman church was replaced by a great aisled church with a
the original Norman church and some direct evidence of the central
was rebuilt, the Chapel of the Shrine was erected. Further
confirmation of its purpose was seen in its layout. It lay at an
even than the church. Its massive walls, too, gave evidence of its
After the building of the chapel, it is known to have stood above the
remains of the shrine could be detected.
builders had destroyed much of the original surface. But indications
chapel, in use until the chapel was built, gave evidence of a
contained wooden building, though their remnants were not sufficient
to determine its exact size and plan.
these graves were seen to have been cut through and destroyed by the
chapel builders.
With them occurred a series of post-holes of similar date,
date and nature of these suggest the possibility of an early pagan
priests often built their new churches on pagan sites, thus hallowing
the temple sites of the heathen deities.
later date, was probably being built in 1511 when Erasmus described
In the centre of the chapel was a great stone-built tomb,
the Dissolution in 1539.
Second Pilot Vessel Launched at Lowestoft
THE PILOT VESSEL Preceder, second of two sister ships which
Lowestoft yesterday by Mrs. Galpin, wife of Capt. R. J.
Capt. D. Mansfield, superintendent pilot at Harwich.
Before being launched the ship was blessed by the Rector of
Lowestoft (the Rev. W. J. Westwood).
The Preceder, sister ship to Patrol, which was launched in June,
is 39 feet long with a beam of 24 feet and a draught of ten feet five
inches. She is powered by two six-cylinder Lister engines which
develop 495 b.h.p. driving a single screw, and she has a designed
A.M.S.M.&sol; VHF set, and medium frequency radio telephone.
Accommodation will be provided for a crew of 20 with Pullman-type
inflatable life rafts.
between Harwich and the pilot cutter on station at the Sunk, where she
will speed up the service considerably, as she is to replace a
FARM INCOMES in England and Wales in 1959 fell by nearly
Figures given in the booklet, based on the union's farm accounts
feeding stuffs.
18 per cent. in 1959. On mixed livestock farms, incomes fell by
10 per cent. A slight increase in revenue was substantially
outweighed by heavy increases in feeding stuff expenditure.
in 1959 led to a reduction in price, and as a result of a decline in
income, and an increase in expenditure, the profits of specialist egg
3709 farms whose year-ending date fell between June 1st, 1959, and May
31st, 1960.
Quarters, R.A.F. West Raynham, was committed to Quarter Sessions
at Fakenham Court yesterday on a charge of breaking and entering a
11th and stealing a quantity of sweets, chocolates, and money, to a
Mr. Brian John Bedford, a service engineer, of 28, Grange Road,
that the shelf on which chocolates and sweets were placed, was bare.
Green Fibres
P.C. A. D. Willsher said that he examined the coffee
bar and found several green fibres in a door post and also on two
crates of soft drinks. Later Maloney produced the clothing he had
Maloney was cautioned and he said, If you come round to my
sweets and chocolates in a cardboard box from his car and then went
1/2d. in cash saying, That is the money I took.
In a statement to P.C. Willsher, Maloney said, I had a
have done it if I had not had so much to drink. He was sorry for
in his statement and would like to add that he was thoroughly ashamed
He was granted bail.
Felmingham Funeral of Mrs. E. T. Lawrence
The funeral of Mrs. Lucy May Lawrence, wife of Mr. Ernest
Andrew's Church, Felmingham. The Assistant Curate of North Walsham,
minister of the North Walsham Methodist Circuit, the Rev. Charles
Staden.
Born at Worstead 77 years ago, Mrs. Lawrence was a land worker
Mrs. P. Bindley, Mrs. P. Lester, Mr. and Mrs. P.
Lawrence, Mr. J. Foulger, Mr. B. Foulger, Mr. R. Amies,
Mr. and Mrs. G. Hicks, Mr. and Mrs. F. J. Hicks, Mr.
T. Hicks, Mr. and Mrs. F. Hicks, Mr. T. Hicks, Mrs. D.
attend. The North Norfolk Constituency Labour Party was represented.
saw a young man removing piping from huts on the derelict airfield,
at &pound;2 9s. 2d., belonging to the Air Ministry.
Inspector John Kenny, prosecuting, said that P.C. James Dent
Derelict Cottage
In a statement to the police Bower was alleged to have said
said defendant  had been very helpful to the police.
told it might be a fine.
know.
He was put on probation for 12 months.
HOW PEOPLE thought they could build a happy married life
Green Lane Estate, Fakenham, on the grounds of his wife's desertion
and her adultery with an unknown man. He exercised his discretion in
The wife, Mrs. Nancy Audrey Boyce, of 9, Green Lane Estate,
Fakenham, denied her husband's allegations and alleged cruelty,
COURT QUIZ ON IDENTITY METHODS
Police methods of holding identity parades were questioned in a
28-year-old unemployed labourer, James Rudd Fenwick of Estoril Road,
Darlington.
Det.-Con. Henry Hammond gave evidence that he and Mr. James
Sunday, October 8. Mr. Hughes had recognised a man who had asked
D.C. Hammond for a light.
Cross-examination
Cross-examining, Mr. Black asked: Did you suggest to Mr.
Why were you in Northgate? &mdash; We were there with a view to
identifying the defendant. I had asked Mr. Hughes to come along.
Question reframed
Mr. Black: I'll reframe the question. You have been
trained in methods of identity parade. Is this the correct way? &mdash;
way.
Mr. Black: Let me reframe again. Is there any recommended
come to the police station.
Had Hughes been shown photographs of the defendant? &mdash;
And other men? &mdash; Yes.
When he elected to go for trial on a third count, a fourth case
of driving while uninsured was adjourned sine die.
Darlington company director Mr. Brian Neasham said he had
parked the company's car on waste ground next to their Bowes Street
car was gone. It was returned to him by Middlesbrough police the next
day. It wasn't damaged in any way, but the radio was missing.
Outlining the case, Mr. Walton said: In fairness to the
yard when a man he recognised as the defendant came to the gate. He
said he was wanting a van or something, and Mr. Hughes said he would
he was waiting for his brother, waited some time and then went. Later
he returned.
Cross examined by Mr. Black, Mr. Hughes agreed that he had
certain that the defendant was the same man. He was wearing a light
suspicious or anything. When he saw Fenwick on the Sunday he was
wearing a suit of a khaki drill colour.
Heard car
Mr. Burley said he heard the engine of Mr. Neasham's car
drivers or Mr. Neasham in the car, and ran towards it. It moved off
I ran after the car as it turned into Brunswick Street. The
at the gate. He was wearing a light coloured raincoat and a cloth
cap.
At Middlesbrough
the court he was in Middlesbrough on the corner of Sussex Street and
and asked him the way to Darlington, and then to Stockton. He
The man got into a car about 15 yards away and drove off. It was
a green Ford Consul, he said. Cross examined he said: It was an
street lamp on the other side of the road about 24 feet away.
On duty
Re-examined by Mr. Walton he said he could not tell the
fast.
Gosford Street walking towards Sussex Street when he saw a green Ford
When it drove towards him with headlights full on, he put up his
hand and flashed his torch. The driver ignored the signal and he had
He was wearing a corduroy flat cap, sports jacket and dark
Cross examined he said he was about 20 yards from the man when he
got into the car. It was definitely a convertible. The street
lighting was sulphur lights on standards about 30 feet high.
He agreed with Mr. Black that sulphur lighting sometimes cast
I'm fairly sure of my answer.
on Mr. Black. &mdash; Yes.
in Northgate on the Sunday. He had been with Mr. Hughes in
Northgate. The defendant had been wearing a green checked suit.
Reserved defence
Fenwick said: I've never been anywhere near the place (Neasham).
taxi about midnight. I had a girl to meet, but I went on the bus
Durham policeman John Middlemiss said Fenwick had been convicted
following a collision involving two National Hunt jockeys.
Witton Castle in the picturesque village of Witton-le-Wear.
charge of dangerous driving, did not go into the witness box.
Scott told the court. He said that as the other car drew near
McCarron swung their car sharply to the other side of the road. But
there was still a slight collision and the other car drove on. I
could not repeat what I said then!
The two jockeys in Scott's car turned around using the open gates
up with it at West Auckland.
I said to the woman driver, What the hell are you doing? But
slight damage on the nearside of Lady Chaytor's car. She refused to
accident before, and I was never on the wrong side of the road.
You can do what you like.
did not think that bringing his client into the witness-box would be
of any assistance Because she cannot recollect this incident.
RECEIVED DRUGS
She stoutly denies this charge and she has not the slightest
for observation and during that time had received drugs, some of which
contained an element of pheno-barbitone.
The only conclusion she can come to regarding this accident is
trouble landed him in a court before the first hire-purchase payment
was due.
working mother said that his heart had been so set on a
She added that she had not yet begun to pay the balance at the
rate of &pound;2 10s a week.
much her son paid for his keep out of the &pound;3 18s he had just begun
to earn, she replied: I let him keep it for himself; he has had to
pay for tax and insurance but said he would help out with the
The youth appeared with another motor-cyclist, Henry Ernest
Skinner-gate on the evening of October 30.
Asked what they were doing they said they were looking for a
motor-cycle, but when further questioned, Chapman said: O.K.
They've found us out.
WARWICK Racecourse is still in the red and is still showing a
council, who asked why the committee had not carried out the Jockey
Club's request. Councillor Fred Vittle said he thought that owners
and trainers would stop running their horses at Warwick if the prize
Councillor Fred Walters asked why the committee had refused the
increase before it found out about other racecourses. Is our prize
money as high as theirs? he asked.
contributions to racecourse executives had been received.
We shall still get plenty of horses. The horses that come to
seating 200 delegates or 120 diners.
The new bedrooms, each of which will have its own private bath or
The new hall, to be called the Lilac Room, can be used either
The new structure, which links the hotel to the ballroom, has a
white rendered finish to the ground floor and timber facings to the
first floor. The conference hall entrance is faced with green slate,
the older buildings it links.
The work, which includes complete modernisation of the entire
Christmas of this year. Main contractors are Turriff Construction
(Warwick) Ltd., the well-known Warwick and London builders.
months, said Miss N. L. Munton, manager of the Leamington and
The percentage for the area covered by this committee
with .8 for the Midland Region and 1.2 for the country as a whole.
There are varied vacancies for both men and women, for the latter
nursing and electrical work.
IF Warwick Town Council's bank overdraft stopped, would all
the capital works undertaken by the council come to an end? asked
Councillor Fred Walters at the July meeting of the council. And, if
that happened, would council house rents be affected?
Councillor Walters was speaking on a Finance Committee
&pound;250,000. The proposal was approved.
Warwick's size.
a completely different basis and cannot possibly be affected.
instructed the Crematorium Sub-Committee to oppose the proposals to
roads. The sub-committee will press for the crematorium to be built
on the original site &mdash; by Leamington's Brunswick Street cemetery.
Warwick Town Council originally decided to build its own
crematorium, but in April last year it abandoned the idea and entered
into a joint scheme with Leamington Town Council and Warwick Rural
District Council. After representatives of the councils had met it
Medway Crematorium at Chatham had inspected five possible sites,
Ansell, outlined the history of the proposed crematorium at the
special meeting of the General Purposes Committee. He said his
committee decided against the Heathcote Road site because of the extra
cost &mdash; about &pound;10,000.
PIECEMEAL
Councillor H. R. C. Walden, said it would be piecemeal
successful and it was wrong to spoil it by building the crematorium.
about &pound;125,000, of which Warwick would have to pay one fifth. If
said.
Councillor Donald Round made his first speech at a council
meeting when he asked the chairman of the Housing Committee what was
being done about the pavements and street lighting at Spinney Hill,
Councillor W. L. Tarver, the chairman of the Housing
The presentation took place in the hospital's new recreation
ALTHOUGH proposed more than 25 years ago, it would be at
said the Mayor of Warwick (Alderman James McGrouther) at a special
town.
Councillor Fred Walters, leader of the Socialist group, said the
council had tried to do several small things in an effort to alleviate
the traffic congestion. Each time they have been refused by people
who have never been to Warwick, he added.
Alderman says: We have got to be realists
the Warwickshire Clean Air Council at Leamington, Alderman E. H.
Fryer told them the reasons why Leamington Town Council had postponed
its smokeless zones programme. But he promised that Leamington would
Welcoming the delegates on behalf of the Mayor (Councillor Miss
Buckingham Palace, Alderman Fryer said he had been against smoke
started to do, but we have got to be realists. If you are going to
said.
It must be done very gradually indeed. In other words, one
The zones that were revoked covered a large area in which a lot
TEMPERAMENTAL
You yourselves said there were insufficient supplies of
can make a good fire, or it can be a most depressing sight.
Unless we can give people a similar fuel to coal, at a similar
smoke control zones in Leamington were rejected.
reasonable price, I can assure you that Leamington Spa will not hang
back, added Alderman Fryer.
DOCTOR'S LETTER
At the quarterly meeting of the council, held at Sutton
Coldfield, the vice-chairman of the council, Councillor Robert
Loosley, of Coventry, claimed that Councillor Dr. H. Gibbons Ward,
of Leamington, had started the campaign against the smoke control
zones in Leamington by writing to the local Press. He asked the
council to deplore the doctor's action.
I did not start the campaign by writing to the local Press.
the council at any time, he added.
Later, Councillor Loosley said: I feel it is wrong for the
RADFORD SEMELE RAISES &pound;1,000
Field Committee has raised &pound;1,000 towards amenities for the village
play  field.
After buying playground equipment, the committee still has a
Committee chairman Mr. P. Bramhall called for full village
Estate, Warwick, would be very suitable for a children's playground,
said Councillor Mrs. E. A. Brown at the July meeting of Warwick
Land behind the garages of Mill Road and Pattens Road was
the borough surveyor was looking into the playgrounds problem. If any
question of urgency arose during the school holiday, then the surveyor
NEW OFFICER
A Midland woman is to be commissioned as a Church Army officer
at a ceremony in London next week.
A and SHE'S TO BE A DEBUTANTE AT VERSAILLES
by William Burgess
fast becoming one of its most efficient practitioners.
She is Miss Diana Cowpe, 18-year-old daughter of textile tycoon
Mr Eric Cowpe, of Thornton Cleveleys and Anchorsholme, and the
glittering apex of her young career to date will be her coming
out celebration at the highlight of the French social season, the
The Cowpe family came to live here seven years ago from Burnley,
where blossomed the business which today supplies the demands of
customers in over 60 different countries.
bath mats, toilet sets, dressing gowns, housecoats, beach wear and
And at the heart of it is the golden girl a fluent linguist, an
expert in public relations, who is fast making herself conversant with
mills. In 1960 the company further extended its interests by becoming
high-powered executive, he has not a single ulcer!
guinea-a-term plus finishing school in Paris, where her schoolmates
Ford 2, and Miss Singer, daughter of the president of the Singer
Sewing Machine firm, whose wedding incidentally she will soon be
stay with the Cowpes in Norbreck-road.
Diana who will be 19 in May, is staying with La Comtesse de
la Forest Divonne, in the Avenue de Wagram, while she is
over all aspects of French culture.
The programme
French civilisation, from history to art, architecture to haute
couture, from the Louvre to the house of Dior, from the drama to
For the ball at Versailles, there will be a dress from Dior and
of the world of fashion.
spell in Madrid.
No playgirl, despite the glitter and the globe-trotting, she has
kept a shrewd eye on the family business, worked hard both at home and
Fleetwood office.
Since she was very young, says her proud father, she has
her for the company's trade name. I have confidence in her ability.
A great girl!
After Roedean, she went to another school at Neuchatel in
Switzerland has already visited the United States and studied
production in the mills of the Deep South.
Last November Mr Cowpe had further proof of his daughter's
the Blind.
daughter, among which the one reproduced on this page takes pride of
place. It was taken by Stara, noted French photographer of Paris and
Baron.
and brains in this modern age.
Spoke about colour bar
of the St Chad's Church of England Men's Society on Monday.
bar, such as was found in the Union of South Africa and which was
known as apartheid.
basis of it was theology it was rank bad theology.
Another type of colour bar was the economic form which existed in
the United States.
a man's status and opportunities depend not on the colour of his skin
but on his character and competence, he added.
Mr Thornley.
Inspiration in a garage
A PEN picture of Bispham artist Miss Kate Smith by MAUREEN
McCONVILLE
Stainforth-avenue, Bispham, looks like any other garage.
But there the resemblance abruptly and completely ends.
Inside, in an atmosphere pungent with linseed oil and turpentine,
Inside, the ordered chaos of artistic activity prevails.
ordinary suburban garage, is a working artist's studio.
The working artist to whom it belongs is Kate Smith, three of
whose pictures have been hung as the centrepiece of the Lancashire Art
year and this is the first time she has exhibited in Lancashire.
Miss Smith has been painting most of her life, striving to express in
Imaginative
the seriousness of painting.
language with something less than the complete assurance with which
she handles paint.
Considering whether she qualified as a modern artist or
not, she told me: I'm just an imaginative painter, really.
This modest personal appraisal needs elaboration.
Bible-inspired
Many of Miss Smith's paintings are inspired by incidents in the
New Testament and express divine and human qualities in the life of
God-made Man.
which simplifies, concentrates and distorts reality to make the
symbolism clear and powerful.
The result is far from traditional, though it has nothing of the
shock value of, say, action painters and other anti-humanists.
In fact, the human feeling in her paintings is one of their
unexpected quarters.
some extent, though now, she told me, she was returning to
One I particularly liked was a study of three girls preparing
to swim. The rhythmic flow of their bodies made an interesting and
full of vigour and delight in movement.
hospitals &mdash; but it has always been her aim to be a full-time painter.
Now she has achieved it. She paints all through the day every
day, starting at 8 a m, taking time off for lunch, and working
A full-sized picture takes about a month to complete and
afterwards, she relaxes for a few days before starting another.
It will be my first attempt, she told me.
But when, last week, the total rose to six with the impending
which this column has been flashing for months.
At function after function this week I am told, it has been said,
Of course not
Well, of course we can't. What is more, unless the political
rot must be stopped, local government in Blackpool could be in trouble
before very long.
How can the parties help? Obviously, I should think, by taking
their councillors on one side and telling them it is time they started
colleagues are quitting the municipal scene, or why quite a number of
others are sick to the teeth.
They know, as one or two have said publicly, that they are going
Indeed, disunity has become a matter for joking.
The other day eight members of the Estates and Housing Committee,
and four Corporation officials, made the long journey into
that when councillors saw the name of the hotel one of them wanted to
By themselves, committees function reasonably well.
that feathers begin to fly.
All hail, therefore, to one of the most recent proposals to come
members of the council) should be scrapped, and replaced by a more
compact and workable body.
&pound;143,780 FOR COMPULSORY PURCHASE
THE Minister of Housing and Local Government is to be asked
areas is &pound;53,720; for the Highgate-road, Woodside areas, &pound;10,120;
&pound;108,415.
The grand total includes &pound;23,365 for 19, Hall-street, and
&pound;12,000 for the Britannia Inn and 97, Hall-street.
cycle dealers and resulted in a fall in the group profits of Jenkin
the year ended September 8 last.
In his statement, the chairman emphasises that in any event the
The board have recommended a total distribution of 10 per cent.
less tax, against 22 1/2 per cent. previously, while the chairman
be substandard.
Stanley and Dorothy H. Stanley, both of Broadways, Brenton-road,
Penn, Wolverhampton. Secretary: A. Bretherick. Registered office:
Sun-street, Wolverhampton.
Appointments
Mr. P. S. Watson and Mr. J. G. Nutman have been
appointed directors of Smith and Nephew.
Eastbourne Mutual Building Society.
exceeded &pound;8,500,000. Sum advanced during year rose by &pound;208,000 to
&pound;1,340,000.
Building society 1960 reports
Building Society now amount to &pound;7,887,647, having increased during
Mortgage assets amount to &pound;6,538,695, the net increase in the
New mortgage advances, secured chiefly on owner occupied private
Share and deposit investment received during the year amount to
&pound;1,232,153. Allowing for withdrawals and the capitalisation of
interest accrued, share and deposit balances increased to &pound;7,204,214.
&pound;1,297,743, being equivalent to 16.4 per cent. of total assets.
(The national average in 1959 was 14.6 per cent.)
4.56 per cent.
Leek and Moorlands Building Society. &mdash; During 1960 assets
and liabilities of Nalgo Building Society and of The Stockport Atlas
Building Society were transferred to Leek and Moorlands. These
transfers are included in the results for 1960 which show assets
the year &pound;8,000,000 (&pound;7,950,000). Reserves increased by &pound;673,000
to &pound;2,930,000. Tax amounted to &pound;785,000. Investments in trustee
securities and cash &pound;10,650,000.
increase of &pound;1,882,000. Investments and cash at bankers
while Reserve Funds are 4.26 per cent. of assets. Advances during
cent. of the total amount advances was on owner-occupied private
dwelling houses.
Markets are irregular
markets have taken some encouragement today from the trade figures,
which are better than expected, and quietly irregular conditions
Gold shares are very firm despite the sharp fall in the gold
price following the U.S. ban on gold hoarding, sentiment being
encouraged by the belief that Americans will switch from gold into
gold shares.
There is a widespread advance in gold share prices, ranging
6d. to 5s., the latter seen in F. S. Geduld.
Industrials are mixed, but with sentiment helped by a
favourable reading of the trade figures. The leaders have rallied
from a dull start. Glaxo, however, remain a depressed spot at 60/10
1/2 on the cut in selling prices.
Textiles are firm on talks of further possible mergers, with good
their earlier falls.
are seen in engineerings. Buildings have gone ahead.
Oils are firm with Shells strong.
New prices quoted today:
Modest improvements in engineering today include Radiation
34/9, Wolseley-Hughes 49/-, Smith's Stamp. 30/-, Wilkins and Mitchell
13/4 1/2xd., Midland Bright 14/-, Midland Iron 5/9, Duport 12/10 1/2
dipped to 28/3 and Valor 15/-.
B.M.C. have shed 6d. to 15/6, and Rovers 3d. to 14/7
17/4 1/2.
Stores are a fairly strong counter, with Wigfalls outstanding at
32/-. Susan Small look well at 29/-.
Albrights are 25/3 and Baggeridge Brick 8/9.
HIGHER PROFITS AND PAYMENT BY EDGE TOOL
Wolverhampton.
Group profits, before tax, for the year to September 30, are
reported at &pound;223,878, compared with &pound;147,126 previously, with tax
on the company's Brazilian Subsidiary was &pound;1,415 against &pound;1,250.
cent. &mdash; the interim having been raised from 5 per cent. to 7 1/2
per cent.
The Brazilian subsidiaries' figures are not consolidated with
the results of the home companies in the group, but the figures show
from 9,700,000 cruzeiros to 10,500,000 cruzeiros.
Home companies in the group include Chillington Tool Co.,
Hunt is chairman.
An increase in trading profit from &pound;78,648 to &pound;100,648, and a
Following the higher 7 1/2 per cent. (5 per cent.) interim,
H. J. BARLOW SHARES
The 2s. Ordinary shares in H. J. Barlow and Co.
more Neville Developments Ordinary Shares.
100 Barlow Ordinary and holders of 200 or more receive 100 Barlow for
ISSUE SUCCESS
The directors of Concentric Manufacturing Co. announce
that of the 1,020,000 Ordinary 2s. shares offered to shareholders on
terms of the issue for the benefit of the company.
It is understood that terms of a counter-bid for the Ordinary
shareholders this week.
a Birmingham insurance broker, and Mr. Alan G. Higgs, a Coventry
businessman.
Saturday) that, having received acceptances in excess of 65 per
12s. a share, and the final date for acceptances has been extended
Mr. G. Greatrex, chairman of Handford Greatrex, said today
offers. He and his family and other directors control more than 60
The &pound;90,000 capital includes &pound;50,000 in Ordinary shares.
filtration and silencing equipment and specialised engineering
products, is raising the interim dividend from the equivalent of 4.58
per cent. to 5 1/2 per cent. on a capital increased by a
one-for-five scrip issue. The total equivalent distribution for the
electrical engineers and scientific instrument makers, increased
The previous year's effective 25 per cent. dividend total is
Tax takes &pound;170,247, against &pound;167,131, leaving the net balance
LONDON GAZETTE
School Lane-close, Rickerscote, Stafford, engineering draughtsman,
receiving order dated September 1, 1953, rescinded. Adjudication
Gold price lowest for six weeks
President Eisenhower's order forbidding U.S. citizens to
hold gold overseas brought a sharp fall in price on the London bullion
market today.
The dollar equivalent is 35.43 against the U.S. official
The fall is the biggest recorded at a fixing since October 27
The dramatic U.S. move to check the flow of gold from
The market later became steadier, and the price rose to around
253s. on further buying.
Of the Eisenhower ban &mdash; announced over the weekend and six days
before he leaves office &mdash; one big dealer said: In all probability
it will create a certain amount of panic selling by Americans.
It is also going to strengthen the views of outsiders that
devaluation of the Dollar, in their opinion, is imminent. So there
may well be a return of heavy buying by them. This would push the
to Mr. Selwyn Lloyd, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, by the
Association of Certified and Corporate Accountants, for his
The association says that while it recognises that abolition of
SHOW PAGE
By ALAN BENDLE
NONE of the singers who has already won through to the rank
of international artist will be with the Covent Garden Company when it
opens its week's visit to Manchester on Monday.
As Sir David Webster, the Garden's general administrator, has
been pointing out, the reasons are two &mdash; the international artists
have too many engagements elsewhere and they are too expensive. The
Callas, a Gobbi, a Christoff, and nowadays a Joan Sutherland or a
It is therefore on real hard cash that he bases his argument that
if Manchester is ready to pay the top price of, say, 25s. a seat,
ones &mdash; always provided that her claims do not unhappily conflict with
houses.
The career of an international opera singer is not a particularly
long one. The harvest of fame must be collected in some 15 years at
most, and to-day, with the tax-gatherer in hot pursuit, no-one is
THERE is a more sensible attitude than that adopted by some
Taking recent years as an example, Joan Sutherland may now be
Rosenkavalier and Boheme); soprano Marie Collier
mezzo-soprano Josephine Veasey (Carmen and Peter Grimes);
and baritone David Ward (Aida).
THAT admirable singer Michael Langdon has one passion that
must endear him to a wider public.
Rosenkavalier &mdash; he sang the role at Covent Garden in November and
Well over six feet tall, he has no crowd difficulties in watching
soccer with an expert eye. But he finds his height a handicap when it
comes to his other hobby &mdash; gardening. The garden, says Michael,
Gudonov, gave him a notable start, and the Grand Inquisitor, in
Don Carlos &mdash; as one of the cast that included Tito Gobbi and
IS the Covent Garden tour repertory too familiar?
Well, you know what happens when a new work appears &mdash; an
the house was half-empty. On its second visit there was a slight
improvement. Next week what will the answer be?
which Peter Grimes has sold out for several performances.
Placed on record
By Roderick Random
Backing to the front
SOMETIMES when you listen to a record, the backing, however
unobtrusive it may be, attracts your attention more than the singer.
I mean no slight on Mr. Gary Miller when I confess that this is
what happened when I heard his record Dream Harbour (Pye,
7N.15338).
entrancingly. It was, I discovered, the work of one of the busiest
I note that he has credits on two other records this week &mdash;
I met Bill for a few minutes just before he began yet another
session for a BBC programme. Chubby, cheerful, duffle-coated and
carrying a bag containing 40 precious band arrangements.
I've done all sorts of things, he said. I was a singer
I was once a journalist. But I'm happy just now to be one of the
Bill spends his spare time with the other sort of stars &mdash; his
ONE thing about Billie Laine. She has got determination.
the Channel or breeding champion poodles, or anything, she'd do it.
As it is she just wants to sing.
from Trinidad, my mother said I ought to learn to type or do
sang.
She sang in clubs and in concerts, until she looked around one
day and asked herself: Where do I go from here?
last July. She didn't know a single soul.
just made her first record for Philips, called Kiss Me (326547,
another like her, she said.
singer &mdash; with Bill McGuffie providing the backing.
down. Pony Time, a fast piece of work by Chubby Checker
(Columbia, 45-DB.4591) and Ray Garnett (R.C.A. 1228) will
That goes for Gee Whiz, by Clara Thomas (London,
HLK.9310), too.
THOUGH one thinks of Tchaikovsky mainly as a lightly popular
orchestral composer, he did write more than 100 songs, many of them
of them are generally known.
Just how rewarding these songs are may be judged from the
Garden, admirably varies the use of his splendid bass voice to suit
the mood of the songs &mdash; from, for instance, the vigour of Don Juan's
The value of the disc is enhanced by a phonetic version of the
ever learned to dance, and I started that when I was three and a
The management pays me to keep it dyed as long as I'm playing
Wanda.
WE were talking in her dressing-room at Manchester's Palace
Theatre, where Miss Courtney is giving an exciting performance as the
pretty loudly.
From a dressing-room down the corridor came the sounds of David
Whitfield limbering up his voice, now almost back to normal volume
after an illness which recently kept him out of the show for two
I count the number of baths people have during the evenings,
She has to wash off the coppery make-up which covers most of her
water, provided it's not too cold. As a child she lived at Herne Bay,
little Virginia following in her wake.
me. It's quite possible that I might have swum the Channel, though
She is also an expert skin diver, and between dancing and
swim-suits under water.
While dancing in a Five Past Eight revue in Glasgow she was
called on to do some swimming in a Royal Command performance.
IT'S funny, mused Morton Fraser, to think that last
year Don Arroll was working for me. And next week he'll be top of the
bill at Manchester Hippodrome with the Harmonica Gang in support.
Not that I mind at all. He's a very nice lad with a lot of
been working on a new BBC TV musical show which makes its debut
next Saturday, and on Thursday were in Edinburgh for a TV show
with Charlie Chester.
For the last eight years Fraser has left the stage performances
to his gang, and has concentrated behind the scenes on management
Fraser told me: We had been playing Cardiff, and I arrived at
the Oldham Empire with the gang and a dreadfully sore throat.
The theatre manager sent for a doctor, who told me: There's
no show for you this week. You're going straight to bed &mdash; unless you
want to be the central figure in a show you won't know anything
BROTHER JOHN AND THE GRANDAD ROACH
by David Hanington
especially is causing Brother John a certain amount of concern. It
hooked bigger fish in his time.
Barrister... coal-miner... flying-officer... farmer...
M.P.... and father of six sons.
monastic sense. His fellow trade-unionists have adopted it as a
nickname, for Mr. Platts-Mills is a staunch union man. He belongs
to the Transport and General Workers' Union. As a farm worker, I
Last weekend Brother John threw open the grounds of his
men and their families arrived to play bowls, eat barbecued chicken
and row on his fish-infested lake.
with vigorous Socialist (with a small s) theories.
am still in favour of the nationalisation of land for all new
buildings.
He wore sandals and an open-necked shirt when I met him this
instead of a belt.
Today is the last day of my holiday, he explained. (His
a vigour which would dismay most other men on the shady side of 50).
He married, and when war started he joined the R.A.F. By
1944 he was a collier in Yorkshire, the first professional man to
But drastic differences of opinion developed. Platts-Mills
two years he sat as an Independent Labour member. At the next
election he lost his seat, and has not turned to politics since.
Iron Curtain. Brother John is chairman of the British-Soviet
Friendship Society. His four older sons have all walked on
ban-the-bomb marches.
and as a film editor. The two youngest &mdash; babies, their father
calls them, although they are 12 and 10 respectively &mdash; are at boarding
school.
Politics seem far away, as one strolls casually round his lovely
13th century house, formerly a monastery and after that a rectory &mdash;
the Platts-Mills still have to pay an annual tithe for their property.
I may take up politics again, he said. But so far I haven't
given it much serious thought.
If he does, I imagine Brother John will set about it with the
BY CAPT. J. FOGGITT
and one would be justified in thinking the old adage no longer
Harbour last weekend when the Norwegian vessel Presthus 2 berthed at
the east end of Aldrington basin.
Constructed in the manner of the old Viking ships so famous in
the history books, this sturdy little craft of only 118ft. length
and 89 net tons is, except for the engines and accompanying equipment,
apart.
outer planking, and the space between the two shells is insulated
and covers being built-up and insulated in like manner. Although
She is something more than a refrigerator ship though, and is in
vegetables, mostly peas, from Antwerp to Shoreham for distribution to
harbour.
made many deep-water passages, crossing the North Atlantic on a number
of occasions to Iceland, Greenland and Canadian ports. There is
this tough little craft, and his crew of six stalwarts when they tell
of the exciting trips they have made together and the manner of their
boasting of the seaworthiness of the ship in which they serve.
Although there were complaints of the liveliness of her capers in
occasions, they were quick to point out that she is a first-class
sea-boat.
Apart from the radio and a small Decca set, there are none of the
Paper cargo
Most of the foreign ships this week have been Dutchmen.
Henriette B and Zaanstroom from Amsterdam came to the inner lay-by,
Molensingel loaded spent oxide at the gasworks for Nantes, Equator
station at Ipswich.
British m.v. Drake bringing brandy from Tonnay Charente early in
the week and the Spanish m.v. Canton Pequena bringing sherry from
Spain.
Getting up steam for celebration
to Steyning line along which the Steyning Flier, the most famous train
leisure hours of the keener enthusiasts, this anniversary nearly
slipped by unnoticed.
County Primary School, Mr. E. C. G. Lewis, went delving into
unearthed, which today are not without their touch of humour.
chugging down the line. It concerns a character called Humphry of
Henfield, an unfortunate lad who suffered from deafness.
He was observed 150 yards in front of the engine, walking between
the metals with an eel-spear over his shoulder.
driver blew his whistle but no heed was taken. Fortunately a
brake was applied, and every means used to stop the train, fortunately
with success.
on walking between the metals, blissfully unaware of the iron monster
and put down his eel-spear, waving cheerily to the engine driver as he
for schoolboy Michael is hard at work talking British Railways into a
commemoration run with an ancient engine.
railways' museum to be worn by officials on the big day. He may
guarantee a train load of guests.
Then, 70 or 80 persons sat down. Says a newspaper report: The
dinner was altogether excellent and the champagne of the finest
managers and officials of the London, Brighton and South Coast Railway
The band, preceded by flags, marched again to the station,
completed one of the jolliest days in the records of Old Steyning.
There is only one sad note about it all. Humphry of Henfield
appeared to take no notice.
AND NOW THERE ARE TWELVE
SIX years ago there were eight independent members of the
Commonwealth. Today there are 12. Who are the other peoples of the
holds us together?
Exhibition at Hove, which is divided into seven sections, each
designed to give an insight into the various aspects of the
belong to it and of their strength and growth.
MOTHERWELL 5, HIBS 1. (Half-time &mdash; 2-1.)
And, glory be, they now have somebody to stick them in the net.
Sure, big Pat Delaney missed some pinches. About a dozen as a
conservative estimate.
So altogether you can say Jimmy Delaney's boy had a reasonably
McSeveney came out some 20 yards ahead of his team mates. It looked
From the final score, you might think he could have done, at
Not so. Until they were latterly demoralised by the jinking
was the rock on which they foundered.
A Bobby Young goal disallowed for offside in the fifth
But the first legitimate counter went to Hibs. Weir stopped a
A deft Delaney header from a McPhee cross restored equality.
Hunter, Delaney, and McPhee. A long, down-the-middle ball eluded
Preston and Delaney. Simpson ran out, completely missed his kick, and
Delaney walked it home.
After the turn 'Well ran riot. Roberts shivered the bar.
Shots flew everywhere around Simpson's goal.
Delaney wrapped number three up in silver paper for McPhee.
Next Pat netted an offside one. Then he sent Young off, and was
in position to capitalise the youngster's cross. And in the last
for a penalty for Baird fouling Quinn.
you ever heard of.
Just a hair's-breadth behind was Willie Hunter. Thomson was a
topper, too. And Delaney, of course. But 'Well really hadn't a
The home crowd goosed Sammy Baird unmercifully for a few minor
real Hibs stalwart.
LOCAL BOY MAKES GOOD &mdash; WITH A HAT-TRICK
DUNFERMLINE ATHLETIC 6, AIRDRIE 2. (Half-time &mdash; 1-0.)
Playing his first League game before the home crowd, the ex-Blairhall
junior, who lives in Dunfermline, scored a glorious hat-trick and
Sure, he still has a bit to go &mdash; but one thing he CAN do is
put the ball in the net, and that's good enough to go on with.
Take a good look at the names of the other goal-scorers. Not a
solitary from Messrs Charles Dickson and his inside-forward cronies.
It took them a long time to get the first goal, but the writing
stopping them.
second half jolted them, but that was all.
along, but refused to go under and never stooped to a shady action.
Just on the half-time whistle he hit a Cunningham free-kick past
around the penalty spot and his header flew into the net.
Then George Peebles decided to take a hand. Within five
minutes he fired a couple of beauties into the net. Sinclair finished
off the Dunfermline scoring.
First he hit a left-footer cleanly into the net, and then sank
a penalty like a veteran after Shanks had handled his first shot,
which finished over the line.
Storrie and Hinshelwood were the Airdrie scorers. Both beat
Connachan from around the 20-yard mark.
No criticism of the Dunfermline defence &mdash; they were never
stretched. All three halves were immense while the forward line,
Very few bouquets for Airdrie. Say Johnstone, McNeil, and
CLYDE STAGE A FADE-OUT
(Half-time &mdash; 0-3)
defence with three snappy goals.
Rovers to come right back into the picture with two good goals, and
for the last 15 minutes Clyde were a worried lot.
LEARY STARS.
the Rovers' pivot. After a disastrous start he found his feet, and
McLaughlin capably led Clyde's attack in the early spell and had
who finished limping on the wing, got the other goal &mdash; in the 7th
minute.
Livingstone made up the brace six minutes later. Crowd &mdash; 1000.
DUNDEE UNITED 2, STIRLING ALBION 0. (Half-time &mdash; 0-0.)
ALBION look doomed for a slide back to the second grade.
were all triers, but they had no plan, no science, no cohesion, in
fact, not a clue.
positively ludicrous.
didn't seem to know how to circumvent a desperate defence.
the winger was obviously offside.
Somewhat laboriously the Tannadice team built up attack after
finish. Carlyle and Gillespie missed inviting chances. Then Neil
The once-in-a-while Stirling raids came mainly through Kilgannon
and Rowan, for not one of the inside trio measured up to anything like
by beating Brown.
Like magic, the strain left the team. Mochan swerved a ball to
destination of the points.
GORDON IN FORM.
attacking sorties.
the best back afield, Neilson the only half-back with any finesse, and
Bonar came by a knee injury and swopped wings with Mochan. This
Crowd &mdash; 7000.
deserved lead. Then Morton came more and more into the game, but had
nothing to show for it.
McKenna put Alloa further ahead in the second half in a breakaway
Hodge, E. Docherty, Vint, and J. Docherty all deserve mention
combine, and Jackie Ferguson and Allan McGraw can fly back to Germany
feeling they didn't let the side down either. Crowd &mdash; 2000.
This beat the previous best opening against India &mdash; 146 by Pullar
and Gilbert Parkhouse at Leeds in 1959.
By the close of play England had scored 288 for the loss of three
Then Up Popped Patterson
(Half-time &mdash; 2-0)
What a mistake it proved to be. In seven minutes Queen's
should really lambast those forwards who were shot-shy against a
strong Queens defence starring McTurk and Rugg. Take Frank Sandeman
been a try from the lot of them.
Queens had some excuse in that Patterson &mdash; delayed in arrival
three-minute burst. Until then Phil Grieve scarcely had a save.
Crowd &mdash; 2000.
FIGHTING FORFAR
Half-time &mdash; 1-2.
BOBBY LEGGE, the ex-Buckie Thistle inside forward, made an
impressive home debut for Forfar. In addition to clever leading-out
brought his side a point.
Forfar were the more impressive side in the first half, when Ross
defence to ribbons, but could not get another goal, and gradually
Knox, on the goal-line, was adjudged to have handled. Right-half
when McCulloch, tearing through, was downed by Berrie.
To Forfar's credit, they tightened up sufficiently to come back
home the equaliser.
Berwick carried most danger in their left wing. Forfar's forward
Stranraer Dominate
(Half-time &mdash; 1-0.)
Stranraer dominated throughout, and only forward failings deprived
them of at least another four goals.
What little football there was, Stranraer played it.
Air Minister Drops In For A Chat
some distinguished visitors to the U.S.A.F. station at Daws
Hill, High Wycombe, on Friday last, chief among whom was the Air
Accompanying the Minister on his visit, which also included a
Private Secretary, Air Marshal Sir Douglas Jackman, Co-ordinator of
The Secretary of State and his party were greeted by
activities and mission in the United Kingdom.
Never A Dull Moment
on Friday.
Miss Walpole, who retires at the end of the year, said there were
be a challenge.
Sad Goodbye
county and the Wycombe division, and local school heads.
Miss Walpole, who told parents and visitors that she could look
back over 40 years in the profession and 27 as a headmistress, heard
words of tribute from Sir Ambrose Dundas, chairman of the school
tribute to staff, girls, parents and members of the council.
I won't say these tributes are not deserved, he said but
is due &mdash; yourself.
Regiment's Visit
THE county regiment of Oxfordshire and Buckinghamshire, the
Press learns.
Detailed plans are still to be made but it is likely that the
days.
challenge local clubs at various sports.
Supporting the company will be the Regimental Band and Buglers
Honours List
VISCOUNT CURZON, chairman of Bucks Education Committee, and
the Queen's Birthday Honours List.
Col. F. W. Watson said Lord Curzon's honour was one much
Frederick Hugh Dalziel Pritchard, Secretary-General of the British Red
of Sandels-way, Beaconsfield, O.B.E.
Now He Is Their Leader
Monday became its new commanding officer.
Pilot Officer Edward Maddox, aged 36, of 26 Squirrel-lane High
Wycombe, took over command of No. 332 (High Wycombe) Squadron from
Flight Lieutenant Harry Drinkwater, who is leaving the High Wycombe
Pilot Officer Maddox, who is married, with one daughter, left the
A.T.C. with the rank of Leading Cadet in March 1943. He went
States and received his pilot's wings.
Reliant aircraft on communications and air-evacuation flights in the
Burma theatre of operations and left the R.A.F. with the rank
officer of the High Wycombe A.T.C. Squadron.
Wye Valley Angling Club.
Plans For Future
Flight Lieutenant Drinkwater, who served as an administrative
officer in the R.A.F. from 1940-46 including tours of duty in
Sierra Leone, Nigeria and the Gold Coast is a former adjutant of
specifically for the A.T.C., which will be erected in the
Musical Barge
WHEN the American Symphony Orchestra arrive in Marlow on July
provide a stage depth of 32 feet.
Established at Pittsburg, U.S.A., in 1957, the orchestra
When the orchestra arrives in Marlow, the musicians hope to be
entertained in the homes of local people. Marlow Urban Council has
to entertain the players. So far 60 of the 65 players have been
Exchange Visits
seven-day visit, have been invited to bring over their national
costumes to wear at one of the two parties organised in their honour.
One of the parties will be on the day after they arrive, on July
22, at Amersham Community Centre. Amersham Ladies' Circle have
offered to provide refreshments on that occasion.
The other party will be in the form of an official farewell
on July 27, the day before they return home. A party of a similar
size will go with them from Amersham for a stay in Amersfoort.
At the final party Amersham Inner Wheel will provide
refreshments, and plans are being made for an exhibition of Scottish
the visitors. Amersham estate agent and historian Mr. L. Elgar
Reading Trends
ALTHOUGH the Prime Minister, Mr. Harold Macmillan, and
books from Princes Risborough's branch library, the public seems less
Closing of the library on Wednesday morning probably accounted in
result of which new books have been more quickly circulated, books
needing repair have had more regular revision and readers' requests
information, especially children, and the library has also played its
Last summer the library served as a point of contact between a
lecturer from Oxford University and people likely to be interested in
launched in the autumn, books for the class being lent from the
library's headquarters.
Social And Personal
A 21-YEAR-OLD Prestwood man, Mr. Roy Taylor, son of Mr.
and Mrs. J. E. Taylor, of High-street, Prestwood, has gained a
first class honours B.Sc. degree from Leeds University. Three years
Challoner's Grammar School at Amersham. He is planning a career in
Mr. Brian James Bond, only son of Mr. and Mrs. P. H.
Oxford, in 1959, and is at present a research student at King's
Bright Prospects For A Bigger Wycombe School
superintendent. And his all-consuming ambition at the moment is to
put the show on to a firm financial footing.
made a good start. But still it must be emphasised that to ensure the
show's continued existence for the general benefit and advertisement
Officials feel that they must have a regular income on which to
This year the show will stage the southern area finals of the
Foxhunter competition, the winners going on direct to the main
show in London. The Green Jackets will stage a marching band display,
horticultural section, always a strong feature, there will be some new
New Deputy Chairman
THE approval of the Lord Chancellor is being sought for the
appointment of Mr. John R. T. Hooper, a well-known barrister
This was announced by Sir Arthian Davies, chairman, when the
Midsummer Quarter Sessions opened at Aylesbury on Monday. Mr.
this week was appointed a member of the Beaconsfield magisterial
A LITTLE MARLOW farmer, Mr. Richard Barnes, of Wood Barn
organised by the agricultural chemical firm.
Carlisle men accused of attack on girl
A SIXTEEN-YEAR-OLD girl's evidence was heard in camera
by Wigan magistrates on Wednesday when three Carlisle men were charged
with an offence against her.
The magistrates (Mr. E. Routledge and Mr. J. Holiday) sat
(22), labourer, address given as 87 Dalton Avenue, Raffles.
The case was adjourned until August 16th because a witness from
The men who were represented by Mr. Lionel Lightfoot, Carlisle,
appeared, on remand, and their bail in the sum of &pound;50 each was
extended.
Mr. A. Carr, Wigton, prosecuting said that the girl met Dixon
They walked back to the fair together, and she later agreed to him
taking her home. When they reached the Silloth Cafe the other two
accused drew up in a van and said they would give her a lift home.
Mr. Carr alleged that all three men committed offences against
the girl in the van despite her protests and struggles.
Cole committed two more offences against her. She was taken to the
the girl's account.
examined the girl on July 9, and the result of his examination could
be compatible with rape.
REPORTED MISSING
Constable James Armstrong said that the girl was reported
home having come off the afternoon train from Carlisle.
Interviewed, Dixon made a statement which was put in as evidence
Saturday night and his pal Lol (Dixon) picked up a girl. They
took her with them to Carlisle in the back of the van. They stopped
at a cafe and Collo (Cole) took her a cup of tea and some
biscuits. He (Earl) offered to take her back to Silloth but she said
Collo. They put her on the 1 p.m. train for Silloth. The
offence against the girl he said he had nothing to say.
severely punished by Whitehaven Bench on Thursday.
In fines, restitution and special costs, they were each ordered
Hensingham and three sixteen-year-olds denied doing wilful damage to a
hay mew, estimated at &pound;10.
he and his family were returning home from a visit to friends, he
heard a disturbance in the barn and tried to catch the culprits.
P.C. Vallance arrived we entered the barn and found these lads
just have a laal bit of fun in the barn. We didn't do all that
damage. The farmer's wife said it could have been done by some boys
who had pulled down dykes before.
CLEATOR Moor's claims for a swimming bath to serve the
whole Ennerdale Rural District were put forward by Coun. John
Collighan at Monday night's meeting of the parish council.
the running for the baths, he added I do not want there to be any
Education stated that the County Youth Committee could not support
Councillor Collighan: I feel we will get no help from the County
that Council agreed there should be a swimming bath in its area.
cost of the baths.
said there had been an improvement on the square, where the buses were
THE quarter-inch thick plate glass window of a
confectioner's shop in Whitehaven Market Place was shattered by a blow
night &mdash; the first day of his annual holiday from work!
The crash was heard by young P.C. Fallowfield, walking home
damage, and to being drunk and disorderly.
Avenue, Woodhouse, who admitted a breach of the peace.
P.C. Fallowfield showed the men his warrant card, continued
I did it for daftness, I can't remember a thing about it,
and damages amounting to &pound;15 and Cavanagh was fined &pound;2 for breach of
Before training for the ministry at Edinburgh University and the
church in 1957.
Mr. Nicholson was chairman of the Cornwall Congregational Union
Union from 1938 to 1946, member of the Council of the Congregational
Church Federal Council at Looe, Cornwall from 1939 to 1945 and at Deal
In Freemasonry he is at present Provincial Grand Chaplain of the
Province of Cornwall.
Mr. Nicholson, a widower, is to be married on August 14 in
Workington to Miss Laurie Taylor, elder daughter of the late Captain
THE annual garden fete held in aid of the Boltongate Church
funds last Saturday was again a big success and it brought in &pound;178.
It was at Quarry Hill by permission of Mr. and Mrs. G. E.
Shaw.
The fete was opened by Mrs. M. Peat, of Silloth. She was
introduced by Mr. Shaw and thanked by Mr. R. Brame and Miss
Grindley, and also presented with a flowering plant by Miss Brenda
Committee by Jean Armstrong, Gillian Robinson, Christine Moore, Hazel
The fancy dress carnival comprised three classes for the
The goods on various well filled stalls were sold quickly, teas
Holding on
Egremont main street with his small son clinging to his back and
holding on to him by the neck, Whitehaven Bench heard on Thursday.
When Sergt. Holdsworth stopped him and told him he would be
reported Jackson, who lives at 9, The Crescent, Smithfield, replied:
I am going to see the Inspector. You have got it in for me.
persons carried on a pedal cycle not adapted for the purpose.
Curious visitors to Frizington main street on July 11 were seven
the cattle had been grazing because an accident had disabled him,
said Inspector Tom Gresham in Whitehaven magistrates court on Thursday
THERE was a large congregation in St. Joseph's Church,
Elizabeth Ball, daughter of Mr. and Mrs. E. Ball, of 41, Sullart
J. E. Cameron, of Townscroft, Dearham. The Rev. Father Tootall
Given in marriage by her father, the bride wore a gown of French
There were four bridesmaids, Miss Freda Cameron, Miss Mary
Books and flower sprays.
Cheshire make provision for increased numbers
IN the next financial year Cheshire Education Committee
This was agreed at the last meeting of the Committee when it was
stated that the estimated income for the year was &pound;1,459,020. The
difference between this and the expenditure has to be found from rates
and taxes.
Commenting on the proposal, Dr. J. G. Kellett, the County
1961, the Committee has had to make provision, not only for
colleges throughout the county, but also for the large increase in the
number of pupils in primary and secondary schools, and students
undertaking further education.
79,720 and the estimated number next year is 80,755, an increase of
This increase is brought about by the natural increase in the
County's population and also by the continual migration of people into
Cheshire is attractive from the point of view of residence, and
the development of industry within the County and in neighbouring
areas means an ever-increasing influx of new population. Added to
SMALLER CLASSES
with over 40 on roll).
Whereas in 1957 the percentage of such classes was 32.9, at
40 on roll grew from the figure of 56.8 in 1953 to 76.4 in 1960.
MORE AT GRAMMAR SCHOOLS
On the secondary side, the number of grammar school pupils will
over 600 pupils each.
The number of secondary modern school pupils will remain at the
population into the County and to the increasing number of pupils who
AN ACHIEVEMENT
faced with such large increases of primary and secondary school
that appropriate secondary education is available throughout the
County for all pupils according to their age, ability and aptitude.
This in itself is a noteworthy achievement in a county with such
grammar and secondary modern schools, good progress is being made with
schools.
improved technical colleges. Major extensions are now in course of
construction at the Carlett Park (Eastham), and Mid-Cheshire
(Hartford) Central Colleges of Further Education at a cost of
Work is due to begin in February on a &pound;260,000 extension at
estimated cost of this will be &pound;398,500, and a new College of Further
Authority in 1961/62.
There is also a steady growth in the number of students at
universities and technical colleges. In the past five years there has
it is anticipated that there will be approximately 50 additional
financial aid for their training in Universities, Teachers' Training
In conclusion it should be pointed out that, based on the net
teachers, medical inspection and treatment, provision of milk and
meals, the transport of pupils and agricultural education) is &pound;12,893
by two different touring companies.
The author raises the query as to whether a father will feel the same
one hand is the wife trying to tie him down to a secure suburban
flashing eyes and a tongue like a whip-lash by dark-haired Sarah
18-years-old daughter to attend.
cities and towns of England, especially those with large Irish
populations. At Chester it will be presented for adults only.
NEWS and Advertiser reader Mr. H. Arnold, who received
TURNING over the Spirit of Wirral calendar I see that
the February picture is of Thingwall whose Viking name was Tingralla.
Tingralla &mdash; there are others in Europe &mdash; which is also snowbound, but
In 1584 King Charles the Ninth gave it a charter as a borough,
the seat of a bishop. Like many other Swedish towns of wooden
and more fire-resisting buildings. It has important industries based
Excepting for about two months in each year commencing about
Canal. Ice put a stop to navigation last week, and traffic has to be
routed by rail or road to and from ice-free ports such as Gottenburg,
morning daily papers, one Conservative, the other Socialist.
They are by no means solely provincial. For example,
yesterday's Conservative paper discusses in its leading article the
times the views of Mr. Woolley, the Cheshire farmer who is now
chairman of the National Farmers' Union.
There is a good deal of interest in the advertising columns.
A fortnight ago there were many Acknowledgements under which
one-inch single column entries were inserted by individual postmen and
those who had given them Christmas boxes.
local authorities and varies from place to place. Hereabouts the
standard seems to be the equal of 55s. per dog over three months
old. Official advertisements remind dog-owners that the charge will
destructive to poultry. Escapees from fur farms, they find abundant
shelter in the forests.
REFUSE IN BAGS
Yesterday the Council of a small local town gave notice in a
put into paper bags before being put into the garbage bins. It
claimed that in summer this would reduce the stench of decaying matter
would not have to dig frozen refuse from inside the bins.
In more than one town the collected refuse is burnt under boilers
which supply hot water to houses, thus cutting out the need for
individual heating plants.
Folk interested in public affairs can learn a lot in Sweden.
They can even learn that newsagents and booksellers sell annuals
(called taxation registers) wherein everybody's assessable income
keeping up with the Jones's. In Sweden they have only to look into
with the Svenssons (Swedish Jones's).
ONE of the most interesting features of local history is the
way in which Wirral's Deeside villages came to be regarded over the
preferred the longer sea voyage to the difficult travel in reaching
the Anglesey port.
Except for the fact that Chester had been established at the head
of the estuary, and when the river silted the Wirral villages were
used as ports instead, it is probable that the estuary would never
could possibly be.
Shelter from westerly winds was virtually non-existent, but the
worst fault from a shipping point of view was that craft could sail
the easterly quarter.
EDITORIAL
for the curtain to rise on the Commonwealth Conference in London.
Will it end with South Africa's exclusion from the Commonwealth?
The issue is touch and go.
becomes a Republic later in the year.
strongest arguments lie?
THE Archbishop of Capetown has shown that the matter is not
clear-cut. The Archbishop has long been a courageous fighter against
On purely practical grounds he holds that it would be a mistake
remains in the Commonwealth than could be exercised were she cut off
On the other hand, those who favour expulsion, including African
leaders, feel that nothing less than the shock of expulsion will
out that Dr. Verwoerd refuses to consider abandoning the apartheid
policy.
that it could not survive.
room for a racist South Africa. And this is a Commonwealth in which
five citizens are coloured for every one who is white.
apartheid is a menace to the Commonwealth and a liability to the whole
of principles excluding race discrimination. And so leave South
Africa to make the grade, or go out.
their tour in the East.
Nevertheless, the tour has been an immense success. The Queen
It would be pleasanter if such cruel and feudal performances as
the Queen and the Duke have pleased millions by their visit. The
WEST GERMANY &mdash; followed yesterday by the Dutch &mdash; has made the
Hopes will now grow brighter of further international
co-operation, which is the only way to solve the payments difficulties
terms is that our exports to Germany will now be a little cheaper for
little dearer.
a means to curb rising prices at home.
Germany exports much more than she imports. For upwards of five
years the world's reserves of dollars have been drained into Germany.
In addition the strength of Germany's trading position has
hoping for the mark to rise, as has now happened.
WILL the new valuation be enough to correct Germany's massive
That is doubtful.
If, however, in addition to her new good-neighbour gesture,
Germany takes a really big share in giving aid to underdeveloped
What gives rise to optimism is the sign that Germany and the
other leading Western nations are at long last moving towards a
An advertisement
would solve all our problems. So it would. While we are waiting for
the millenium, however, most of us would prefer to put our hopes for
our local and national Parliaments.
falls into neither category, though many readers will dislike it. We
publish it in the belief that the alert readers of the Herald will
The hard way of peace
THE authority of the United Nations has suffered grave injury
in the Congo. It must be restored.
A United Nations force composed of 135 Sudanese has been disarmed
and expelled from the supply port of Matadi, after being heavily
attacked by a much stronger force of Colonel Mobutu's Congolese
400 troops in the Congo would be taken home.
The reaction can be understood. The Sudan's concern for its men
logical to send in more men, not weaken it further by desertion.
It is unjust to pass the buck to Mr. Hammarskjold and the
is not a ceremonial duty, and the soldiers have every right to blame
the politicians unless they see it through.
would arise unless it gave him the physical power to comply with the
policy. That was the first point that Mr. Hammarskjold made.
THE UN's ability to keep peace depends simply on
The Americans were justified in diverting naval ships in case
non-combatant help was wanted; but they stressed that there was no
intention to intervene in fighting. Yesterday the ships turned away
again, satisfied that they were not required.
It is to be hoped that the UN will be re-established in
their port by negotiation and that there will be no more outrages.
But back, Mr. Hammarskjold is determined, they must go.
conciliators they are meeting for the first time, in Malagasy
(formerly Madagascar).
gets itself a government which all outsiders can recognise.
Nobody will want to police the Congo when the Congo itself can do
Meanwhile every statesman in Africa must realise that there must
THE British public has now had the chance to take a
He has made a strong impression. But not, perhaps, quite the
impression that he intended.
For most people the sight of that bland, unctuous, impregnably
righteous face, wreathed in smiles, has been enough to make their
blood run cold.
it would be possible to argue with him rationally.
But a man who believes, like Dr. Verwoerd, that a basically
evil policy is good, that it has the sanction of religion and is a
bulwark of Christianity, is beyond the reach of reason.
ONLY a man wrapped in the impenetrable cocoon of what he
A good neighbour to those Africans who will continue to live as
The Archbishop of Capetown, Dr. Joost \de Blank, has pleaded
that South Africa should be allowed to stay in the Commonwealth.
apartheid will be left even more isolated and alone.
The views of the Archbishop, who has maintained an unflinching
But what, in fact, can the other Commonwealth countries do to
bring support and comfort to this gallant minority?
EXPULSION?
modified the actions of the Nationalists. On the contrary, apartheid
is being applied ever more ruthlessly.
Dr. Verwoerd is leading them to disaster.
record that they regard apartheid as evil and indefensible.
return home claiming a triumph. His smile will be blander than ever.
and June, when the Duke of Kent will marry Miss Worsley, hardly a day
nuptial arrangements.
Men readers may grow more than a little weary of it all. So may
a few emancipated women who pride themselves on their commonsense.
Time to start talking
One of the grim oddities of the Berlin crisis is that everyone
is in favour of talking but nobody seems to know how to start. The
State Department keeps approving of meaningful negotiations and
so even does President \de Gaulle, though his notion of what makes
talks useful or timely is a lot more restrictive than other people's.
Khrushchev too sees a glimmer of hope for talks, preferably on
Yet hardly anything is done to bring talks nearer. On the Western
joints which afflicts everybody, have been two: the West German
down in earnest to the business of working out a common approach to
The means of setting talks going are clear enough provided that
the Soviet Government wishes to talk at all. The session of the
together the Foreign Ministers of Britain, the United States, and
of a change of heart (whatever that may mean) would have us run risks
greater than the West ought to run &mdash; and greater than President
interests of the West in Berlin and what we suppose that the Soviet
retreated from in the present state of Europe. Yet the question
remains, as before: is the Soviet Government interested chiefly in
for it? Or is it determined to do away with the freedom of West
Berlin and free access to it (on the excuse of keeping out
signs now are that Britain and the United States at all events might
bringing in the United Nations, it would presumably mean admitting
the West to do except stand firm.
be a clash leading inexorably to mutual annihilation? After looking
civil disobedience and go to prison. All honour to him for acting
Victor Gollancz, who in a letter on this page proposes that Mr
Macmillan should proclaim his readiness to negotiate naked and
move our allies or Mr Khrushchev &mdash; or indeed what it would mean &mdash; is
not clear. The choice lies not between nuclear war and Soviet
self-dissolution of the West that would come of a surrender of West
what we should call cool-headed and inventive negotiation, is a means
not to destruction but to safety.
Rhodesia Constitution is open to revision. This is news, however much
be in accordance with normal practice. The formula which has
caused all the trouble is itself a revision, brought about in
The Government is now saying that consideration of these reasonable
representations is being delayed by the outbreak of violence. In
fact, the cart and the horse are the other way round: the violence
broke out because the reasonable representations went unheeded.
Federal) have made is that the Legislative Council elected under Mr
Macleod's system of three blocks of seats shall contain a
made it very unlikely; if Formula Three restores the original
the Government should ever have been led away from this principle. It
Programme for Katanga
in Elisabethville. A full account of these incidents will no doubt be
demanded by the General Assembly next week.
The general feeling is that if the United Nations wanted to clean
altogether falsely &mdash; as a secure and industrious little state beset by
the whole Congo for the unbalanced development of only a part of it.
and the general lot of rural Congolese. This will be true however the
happy-go-lucky expansion and the perpetual Budget deficits of the
rebuilding of the Congo.
industry and no European agriculture (apart from the plantations) to
bolster up the rest of the economy. The explanation may be that in
proposition, which is why no country has recognised it, and why most
of the Europeans serving in its forces have been ne'er-do-wells. The
to a worse tragedy.
and for this purpose the Central Government is sending a commissioner
formerly associated with M. Gizenga's Stanleyville regime. The
notably failed to make capital out of his succession to Lumumba: it is
authority. But this is not the way for the Congo-Katanga dispute to
the United Nations of M. Tshombe as President of Katanga Province.
provincial Government. An attempt has already been made to organise
has been shown that independence is not allowed he should strive for
as much provincial autonomy as the other States will give him. He
should not despair of keeping a large part of his copper revenue.
Dr O'Brien has praised the valour of Katanga soldiers. M.
It is encouraging news that Mr Gromyko, the Soviet Foreign
Minister, will meet Mr Dean Rusk in New York next week for a talk
taking up President Kennedy's suggestion, made on Wednesday, that such
a meeting should be arranged while Mr Gromyko is over for the United
Nations General Assembly.
Modibo Keita said after his talk with Mr Kennedy on Wednesday, a
Summit meeting must be prepared at a lower diplomatic level. This is
between the two sides has been made. There have been plenty of
general declarations about willingness to meet and talk, but
York next week is an important advance. We must not be
overconfident that this meeting will lead on to further and decisive
ones; but without it, we could not look for them.
Getting it over
Federal Germany votes tomorrow and not a day too soon. There
of the country wanted to see over and done with. To Germany's Western
paralysing their efforts to work out sensible ways of dealing with the
Governments had not been convinced that they must do nothing to harm
even remotely Dr Adenauer's chances of being returned as Chancellor.
But they were so convinced and they have had to take the
ACROSS BARRIERS
has added substance to the aspiration of its title. The entry of the
Rumania has had two stimulating effects. Some east European churches
longer a few among the many that come from the world of the
Reformation. At the same time the evangelical complexion of the
Missionary Council and the admission of growing communions in South
America and newly independent churches in Africa. There are now twice
the first assembly in Amsterdam in 1948. The approach to universality
Many of the churches which came together at Amsterdam thirteen
years ago had long cooperated in the two movements &mdash; Faith and Order
and Life and Work &mdash; whose confluence formed the council. Cooperation
since then has steadily grown. The entry this year of so many
churches unaccustomed to these ecumenical encounters may hold up the
continuing bodies and this may be at the cost of some efficiency.
Unanimity will come less easily. The Anglican and main Protestant
Orthodox churches makes more contentious. On the other hand, there
has been a striking agreement on the delicate matter of defining the
Such a body cannot address itself successfully to many of the
what is to be done in such and such a special field but on the
criteria by which the Christian should be guided. The declaration on
current points of east-west conflict could not go much farther than,
for example, the truism that policies of menace and mutual disarmament
cannot be followed together. What the council has done &mdash; and it is an
one Russian delegate, older churches like his own have personally
The theme of facing together the broader tasks that can be
recalling the prophetic words in 1938 of DR. J. H. OLDHAM,
Study must be undertaken by the churches in common, for the new
forces are world forces; they will sooner or later affect the life of
every church, and it is therefore essential that on this point the
The shifting weight from western to eastern communities
and congregations to respond to the call to fresh service, and to
assimilate into their daily witness the common thought of the member
churches.
continuing common study and action. Since the last assembly help for
with different voices and stresses. In the Russian Orthodox Church
the council has incorporated a community with a distinctive tradition
of Christian witness, emphasizing devotion and not social work. In
followed a tradition far older than 1917. Their position is close to
in any man. We must not apply human, civil, or political categories
Some problems of such a world meeting remain unresolved. A
visible as opposed to merely spiritual unity was endorsed at
Delhi; but it is doubtful if it was greatly advanced &mdash; or, indeed,
Although he is no longer a titular chief ALBERT LUTHULI is
Africa. His arrival with his wife in Britain on a flying visit before
for his courage, sincerity, and restraint. It is ironical that he
Africa will be celebrating the annual holiday which in origin
commemorates the victory of the Voortrekkers over the Zulu Impis at
Blood River.
MR. LUTHULI, who belongs to that proud and warlike people,
is one of those Africans who have buried the hatchet. He has always
shown himself ready &mdash; and no one who knows him can doubt his
Coexistence with their white neighbours on terms of mutual
have understood the significance of this powerful encouragement to
Unfortunately it is looking backwards that has prevailed. Those who
put MR. LUTHULI into prison and then placed indefensible
MR. LUTHULI only over the sights of their rifles.
Even the permission given to leave the native land which is half
measure up to the international standard laid down for the award of
the Nobel Peace Prize. The South African Government is the last
decision of the Swedish judges has rightly been applauded in all
countries that believe in freedom and scorn racial injustice. MR.
for saluting a veteran fighter for peace.
Hire-Purchase
With the first and fundamental clause of MR. W. T.
increasingly important weakness of the existing legislation (the 1938
Act as amended in 1954) is that, apart from livestock, it governs only
agreements involving goods worth &pound;300 or less. As the Conservative
for livestock. MR. WILLIAMS sets out to achieve this. The
existing limits have long been out of date, especially since the
The efforts of MR. WILLIAMS to make the terms of agreements
agreement is signed. To this there will be some opposition. The Bill
Private Members' Bills in the offing will fill all the gaps. This
until the next report from the Molony committee. Comprehensive
Centigrade v. Fahrenheit. The fight is on. The challenger
has behind it not only the authority of the SECRETARY of STATE
Meteorological Office. The press and the broadcasting authorities are
ring together. SIR GRAHAM SUTTON, however, made no bones about it
yesterday. The purpose is to give fahrenheit the knock out. The
the change. It is true that SIR GRAHAM said there is at the
This, however, seems a matter of the convenience of specialists. The
ordinary British man and woman is conscious of no difficulty. Rather
than fifty million people having to be put out for the sake of 50,000
than the other?
when this would suit their convenience &mdash; rather than to change their
enforce the adoption of the twenty-four hour clock. Then, also, the
well-meaning corporation became very unpopular. So much so that the
new system, which was inaugurated in April, 1934, was thrown out in
August of the same year. It is generally a sign that Governments are
balked in the big things when they cannot leave the little, familiar
One of the little trials that a man must learn to bear when he
admits the telephone to his home is that, when he hurries to its side
to answer a call, it will sometimes stop ringing before he gets there.
He is dividing the dahlias at the bottom of the garden, or hanging a
critical bit of wallpaper in the spare bedroom, or delicately
adjusting the car in the garage, or listening absorbed to a concert on
of countries.
up trouble in the Congo, orders every Belgian citizen to quit his
Boldly and clearly
HOUNDING Belgium has become an international pastime. Why?
mourning a terrible air crash, is made their scapegoat.
Who will speak up for Belgium? Who else but Britain. We have
fought beside Belgium in two world wars. We are allies still.
language of diplomacy, but boldly and fearlessly.
It is time to show the world that this country does not desert
her friends.
THE FULL TABLE
been so well stocked. Supplies of meat and dairy produce were
substantially higher last year than in 1959.
Lucky, lucky housewives! To have such a splendid variety of
today!
GO AHEAD
THIS is colour day, proclaimed the American television
network, N.B.C. And hour after hour it poured out its programmes
TV service, but the commercial TV contractors want to delay
it for 10 years.
The Government should settle this argument with two words to the
MAN OF SYMPATHY
ONE man beyond all others is saddened by the deaths of two
Mr. John Crabb, clerk to Newmarket urban council, says: I
shall always feel this as a personal failure.
There is no reason whatsoever why he should reproach himself.
The sisters had to quit as their home was falling down. And Mr.
often lacking in officialdom.
LION RAMPANT
MR. HENRY NEWTON of Acton does not want his daughter to
marry a Scotsman. He says that the Scots are foreigners who have no
business to be in England.
The first ruler of the United Kingdom was a Scot. The Lord
Chancellor is a Scot. The Prime Minister is a Scot &mdash; and so were four
of his predecessors this century.
Let Mr. Newton beware. By protesting against Scotland he may
be guilty of rebellion!
During this period Britain will be expected to subsidise and
Imperial Preference.
How splendid it would be if, just for once, the Government were
to voice the real feelings of the British people.
And tell Makarios they are not prepared to accept him on such
terms.
OPTIMISTS WIN
GOOD cheer for the week-end. Ford Motors are to put 13,000
men back on a five-day week. One more demonstration of the industry's
As springtime approaches, orders pick up. And the car men get
ready for another bustling season.
The pessimists said the motor industry was on its knees. The
optimists said Nonsense.
As usual, the optimists have been proved right.
OUT AND ABOUT
It is their protest against the H-bomb.
They ought to have a pleasant time. The weather forecast is
enjoy the sun. Not in a foolish cause, but in a glorious one.
earn only a fraction of what their talents and responsibilities could
bring in the open labour market.
The unions are fortunate indeed to find dedicated leaders at
good employers.
THE Labour Party says that the Tory Government is
destroying the social services.
Under the Labour Government 18.1 per cent of the national income
serf.
behave like that.
But do they ever ponder how their gardening tools are
mysteriously returned to the shed; their books tidied; and often, even
their shoes cleaned?
How wonderful if they showed their appreciation this morning with
a surprise box of chocolates or a bunch of flowers!
THIS IS THE PRICE OF HASTE
Rhodesia!
Eighteen months ago this territory was peaceful, orderly, and
thriving. Africans within the Federal Government were getting
Colonial Secretary.
Overnight, minor African politicians were inflated into
international figures. And as the British Government stepped up the
But if it fails to modify that plan Rhodesia may well be plunged
into chaos, like the Congo.
For Mr. Macmillan and his ministers there is no choice. They
they have done.
WHO can grow the fastest? That is the exciting competition
Top of the table, at the moment, is the chemical industry. Then
comes engineering, followed by iron and steel.
upsurge in investment. It reports that new factory building this year
is likely to be 40 per cent up on 1960.
Britain's business men are right to back their faith with cash.
THEIR FREEDOM
Ban-the-Bomb crusade, has a devoted following. Thousands march with
him &mdash; and sit with him too.
It is said by some that he is a saint; by others that he is a
prophet.
He is, in fact, a philosopher with a highly developed sense of
publicity who has been spectacularly wrong on the great issues of our
time.
How long?
BEFORE the war he urged the British people to welcome
war against Russia. Now he wants Britain to demolish her defences.
able to pursue their eccentric campaigns in freedom.
They should ask themselves this question: How long would that
GOOD WILL MAN
AN experiment in courtesy is launched by the Electricity
difficulties for householders when trenches are dug outside their
front gates.
GOOD for Sir Roy Welensky! The tough, resolute Premier of
the Rhodesian Federation shakes the life out of his critics.
He calls them jelly-boned. He promises to preserve
the West.
CONTRAST his firm, successful rule in Rhodesia with what has
There Welensky's opponents have carried their theories into
practice. There a UNO army of Africans, bossed by an Indian, has
been in charge for months.
And what has it made of the Congo? A bloodstained shambles.
No wonder Welensky has lost all patience with his misguided
They have earned his strictures. And his contempt.
THE THRIFTY ONES
too much and spend it all when they get it. Now a survey of the Post
Office Savings Bank shows how wrong that idea is.
spend more.
But how splendid that in the most prosperous days in this
against Danish competition.
of free trade. There is no doubt what the Danes understand by free
It is that they should be free to sell as much as they like here,
while buying more and more from our rivals. Germany has now
fight it.
reopened next week by Barry Flanagan and Eric Platt, both aged 19.
The combination of enthusiasm and shrewd anticipation of public
film industry. It could be curtain up on two success stories. Of the
DONS at Cambridge want the study of agriculture to become
an honours degree course.
Farming is Britain's most vital industry. It is increasingly
Now Cambridge has the opportunity to show it is just as
HERE ARE THE NEW PIONEERS
JOHN GLENN, Virgil Grissom, Alan Shepard. One of these
three men has a date with destiny &mdash; the first journey into Space.
At the beginning of this wonderful century many people believed
that there were no more worlds to conquer.
taking care of all foreigners who want to have a good time here and
hard time on their hands.
British Host at Work.
One: A citizen of the U.S. was last week walking down
I Hate You
Our transatlantic friend mildly replied: That's just too
bad.
is well loaded &mdash; or drunk.
The assailant then resumes: But if there's anything I can do
He then took out a piece of paper, wrote his address on it and
added: Anybody mucking the Yanks about had better call on me first.
The other incident occurred in the boat-train from Cherbourg to
Two Americans on a visit to Europe &mdash; it was at least their
They renewed mild pleasantries and, after some international
chit-chat, they told him that they were going to end their
They had in mind a kind of reviving postscript to the
eccentricities of the Continent to be concluded in the sage,
philosophical calm of the Anglo-Saxon world.
The Englishman in the train said: Mind if I give you just one
The travellers from the New World who had been in Britain many
times before, were slightly stunned.
Britishers never run out of unturned stones.
darndest, I offer these sad complexities.
IN the 1830's the Luddites took sledge-hammers to their looms
hammer again.
Hence the hostility to automation and the stop-watch
manufacturing methods that have led to restrictive practices.
a firm specialising in electronics in Los Angeles.
They have developed a new system whereby completely untrained
high-speed listening to recorded instructions on how to do the job
coupled with explanatory TV pictures, into becoming a highly
Not only can the raw human mind be technically equipped very
but, by being given another of the new audio-TV training
techniques, he can be switched to a different industry if he just
completely new job in less time than it takes to say Tolpuddle
eleven players each.
Not so, dear Oxford Dictionary.
Shades of the village stalwarts of Hambledon who are now the
A couple of bumps on a pitch have no terrors for a good batsman
with a stout heart, a firm grip on the willow and a hefty contempt for
six these days as rare as frostbite in summer.
EICHMANN continues to reveal the extraordinary watertight
Not content with arguing that he was only an efficient cog in the
to the death of six million Jews was decent, feasible and
multitude saying: I am innocent of the blood of this just
despite my low rank.
Eichmann is on dangerous ground when he pleads that he was only a
small unit on the base of the triangle that led to Hitler, Himmler,
In examination he betrayed an expert and intimate knowledge of
every link in the chain of command that led to the top. He understood
the whole apparatus with an exact and meticulous comprehension that
could only have come from a man who used the system &mdash; and used it with
power and authority.
Holland, Belgium and France they really believed Hitler when he
screamed at them that they were being encircled.
nations live in prosperity or starve to death like cattle interests me
only in so far as we need them as slaves to our \Kultur; otherwise
it is of no interest to me.
Dispatched...
This concept of slavery included Britain.
General Brauchitsch signed a directive ordering that after the
population between the ages of seventeen and forty-five will, unless
the local situation calls for an exceptional ruling, be interned and
In no other conquered country, not even Poland, had the Germans
begun with such a drastic step.
been as good as their evil word.
Officious Efficiency
language, but in spite of all their bluster, they let many a big fish
days.
But the blood suckers have already been after him, demanding
particulars in the usual minatory language including a blackmailing
line which says: If you do not do this, you may have to pay more
May His Tribe Increase
the catapult-and-conker stage of life, was a piece of sentimental
verse by Leigh Hunt.
It was called Abou Ben Adhem and the Angel.
Abou Ben Adhem (may his tribe increase!)
Awoke one night from a deep dream of peace
An Angel writing in a book of gold.
More &mdash; or Less?
I didn't realise, in my world of swarming, suburban kids in
But they were &mdash; and still are.
In Burma the Government is urging the population to multiply
because, says the Minister of National Planning: If present trends
continue and there is no increase, the Burmese will disappear one
day.
Not far away, across the Bay of Bengal, India's Government is
urging the population to have themselves sterilised and paying them to
have the operation.
The Earth is crammed with teeming, multiplying humanity.
The blessing ~May his tribe increase in 1961 sounds like
a curse. In our own country there are nearly 53 million of us. We
are more thickly populated than teeming, bursting Japan.
Only one country in the world has more people per square yard
By 1975 we cannot, on present figures, be less than 3,800
we will be about 6,300 million in all.
Un-nuclear less...
Did They Know?
they did not know of the appalling deeds that were inflicted on
Reich.
Yesterday I received a letter from an ex-SS man now living
might well cost me my job.
He writes: Your statement that the German people knew what
murdered.
You don't do that unless you have a deep conviction that your cause
Our officers always told us never to degenerate to the level of
murdered (shot in the neck) by Russian troops who had captured them
says BOB LEESON
Papen, in Berlin.
Britain is uncomfortable in her role of champion of German
the agreement to stop building bombers, and added: Without
jeopardised.
talks with the British Defence Minister, Mr. Watkinson.
rearmament.
Herr Strauss told the Daily Mail last October that his policy
was to make his country the strongest militarily in Europe and the
Common Market.
He continued this week the argument with Mr. Watkinson which he
had in public at a Nato council meeting last year over the question:
A 90-day war, the West German view, provides the pretext for huge
German armed forces (within Nato of course) and for those to have
bases all over Western Europe.
similar facilities to German troops in Britain.
attacked Britain for being an obstacle for West Germany's plans for a
would link together the various West German facilities.)
By the end of the year there will be 11 German divisions in Nato
compared with four divisions of British troops.
Alongside these divisions a force of over 600 Starfighters
288 missiles and 36 firing ramps, including weapons like Matador
Last month West Germany was reported to be halfway toward this
stronger and stronger.
eyes on is control of the warheads to these weapons. General
planning committee.
All this has been achieved through Nato under American
They have helped build up Nato and rearm Western Germany, in
Britain must stay in it to keep the Germans in control.
militarists, is, in fact, the cover for building up their power.
What must Britain do?
for atomic arms.
friendship with the Soviet Union can prevent another betrayal like
that of the '30s.
National president of the Association of Engineering and
Shipbuilding Draughtsmen, writing in his personal capacity:
policy decisions established at the Scarborough Labour Party
Conference I am appalled at the character of the current attack
against those decisions.
conferences of the movement and take a licking. For us, unity meant
delighted, more so because the alternatives had been put clearly to
the movement, which had then chosen a vigorous anti-Nato, anti-Tory,
ignored it, the inconsistency between support for the war alliance,
with resulting colossal spending on armaments, and our basic effort to
improve living standards.
Instead, we saw the Gaitskellites using the position of
Confusion of the original issue by misrepresentation of the
decisions, the introduction of a pseudo third way and the call for
party unity &mdash; in effect, a demand that the movement unite with the
decisions.
It would become easy to become cynical and to despair. And yet,
confusion were positions lost.
the Peace movement is still advancing and that clarification of the
issues can bring a majority to secure the Scarborough decisions.
Powerful units have stood firm. In unions where the central
issues were confused, clear policy details &mdash; as on bases &mdash; were
Peace policy
This, and the numbers of active workers who are beginning to
were.
drive to improve West Germany's armament, the new attempt to rush
present a whole new proof that to abandon Scarborough is to expose
Britain and her working class to sharp new dangers &mdash; that Gaitskellism
is bankrupt.
through Tory policy &mdash; Gaitskell's stupid hope.
ABE MOFFAT
basis, or by creating further confusion within the movement.
their own convenience.
Unity can never be established by any formula uniting those who
oppose German troops being trained on British soil and Polaris, and
those who are for this policy &mdash; which is the same as that of the Tory
Government.
bases, but are in favour of German bases and troops being trained on
The new Defence statement, while accepting that Britain cannot
remain an independent nuclear Power, now supports the policy of
depending on American nuclear weapons and the H-bomb, placing Britain
The statement of Padley and Crossman is no different in principle
to the new defence statement. They accept American nuclear bases, and
also the use of nuclear weapons and nuclear strategy until some future
date.
They deceive the people by their talk of political and collective
controls the American H-bomb, and who will actually give the
There is only one way to develop unity and at the same time
defend Britain.
This was shown at the Scottish Trades Union Congress,
representing 800,000 organised trade unionists, when it decided by
installed on the Holy Loch, or any other part of Britain.
Tory menace
for the defeat of the present Tory Government, which has become a real
It is quite evident that the movement will go on record against
training.
use of nuclear weapons in Britain.
Britain then could play a leading and independent role for an
it is doubtful whether more than a handful of new apprenticeships will
This week of window dressing will not prevent most of the hopeful
It needs more than 10,000 church parades and open days at techs,
Wolverhampton for Britain's technical training to catch up with the
space age.
The heli-hopping Duke of Edinburgh, opening a few technical
college extensions, will not keep us abreast of the scientific
revolution.
Out of the 550,000 young people aged 15-17 starting work in 1960
Low wages
The Duke, possibly speaking from experience, stated: Most
unskilled jobs are reasonably well-paid and many look attractive.
for girls &pound;4 13s. If a minority got as much as the Press says they
do, then those below average must have received a pittance.
Apprentice wages are below average: a 19-year-old engineering
apprentice may get as little as &pound;5 8s 1d.
But the Duke is wrong when he implies that young people prefer
unskilled jobs. Countless numbers who want training are denied it.
considered suitable by the board.
Admiralty exams for Rosyth dockyard last year.
Getting Ready for the Budget
1. Tax Reforms for the 1960s
THERE are two basic points which seem to be a necessary
demands of a prosperous society, the revenue required by central and
The second point to be made is that tax reform is a very
whole tax structure.
beside the existing structure.
The Objectives
some of the long-run objectives towards which tax reformers should
go &mdash; something noticeably lacking in recent years.
The objectives might be listed like this:
1 &mdash; that the system should be efficient.
another.
3 &mdash; that it should encourage personal saving and the wider
spread of ownership of assets and property.
exports and investment in efficient production methods.
most in the past year. With a disappointing export performance and a
slow rate of economic expansion many people have been turning to the
Yet strangely enough it is here that there is least evidence that the
present system offends.
Nevertheless, the grumbles and complaints are too frequent to be
and surtax) and capital (death duties and stamp duty) that we will
begin.
we often forget that below &pound;2,000 the taxpayer is only charged at
either paying no tax at all or the full standard rate. A sensible
rate more gentle and less forbidding to the millions who are now
attempting it.
Further up the scale, where progression starts again with
surtax, one of the most painful transition periods for the
of the income tax scale to the top.
taking away more than, say, 15s in every pound a man earns, is not
so much that it is unfair or discouraging to the nation's decision
and more time with their accountants seeing how their incomes can be
kept out of this range. The temptations increase to draw benefits in
The cost to the Exchequer of placing a ceiling of 15s in the &pound;
on direct personal taxation would be about &pound;20m. This should be
done.
first is the tax status of married women. Where the husband and
wife's combined incomes come to less than &pound;2,100 (where surtax for a
over single persons. But above this level they are severely
When shortage of labour is one of the main checks on our scope
for increasing output rapidly, the case for making separate
assessments seems particularly strong. The cost to the Exchequer of
separate assessments for surtax (or, as we have redefined it, income
tax above &pound;2,100) on earned income alone, but not on investment
start.
THE second source of concern is the widely-held suspicion
for transferring the main burden of taxation from income to
expenditure.
But the alternative suggestion that the Inland Revenue should
regular capital gains raises almost insuperable problems of legal
This raises the question of capital taxes on the individual. One
of the weaknesses of Conservative government has been its reluctance
predecessors did freely. On the contrary, Conservatives have been
content to accept a system which works directly against their declared
Estate Duty is a good example. The main victims of Estate
Duty &mdash; duty paid on the inheritance received rather than what is left.
allow small firms to pass into wider family ownership without forcing
figure of &pound;30m. has been quoted.
More Incentives
If the Chancellor really wanted to get more people into the
saving and investing habit he could, without difficulty, go further
and give relief on the first slice of an individual's income from his
investments. For the coming year the cost of these two concessions
standard income tax rate plus a 12 1/2 per cent. profits tax. The
smoothing out of income tax rates, without any special concept of a
that companies would have to be taxed on a separate schedule.
The obvious candidate to replace the present complicated two-part
straight corporation tax. This could have the added advantage of
flexibility (it could be varied independently from personal taxes) and
In these ways the more painful, inefficient and discouraging
aspects of our taxation system could be modified, at a cost of little
more than the amount which, on the gloomiest view, the Chancellor may
have to spare &mdash; just over &pound;100m.
about the main existing indirect tax, purchase tax.
It seems to me that discussion of changes in this field can be
Getting Ready for the Budget &mdash; 2
Why Not a Local Sales Tax?
DAVID HOWELL
WHEN the idea of more taxes on spending is canvassed, it is
&pound;1,229m.
The other taxes on spending are the oil tax and tariff charges,
suggestions for a further impost on spending in the form of a sales
items not affected. Food and sweets, fuel and light are not taxed;
nor are books, magazines, children's clothes, some kitchen equipment,
sheets and towels.
No services bear any kind of tax. On the other hand, a wide
and appliances; and so, too, are cosmetics, radios, records,
jewellery, toys, cameras, carpets, wallpaper, most clothes, hats,
gloves and furniture.
Thus if goods alone are considered, few items are free of a
rate tax and that this should be extended, if administratively
possible and right in principle to tax.
High and Wide
Some calculations were done for Lord Amory when he was
Chancellor on this basis and the conclusion was reached that a uniform
The widest possible range chosen could, in fact, have been
food items, taxed in other countries, were excluded. Had they not
been a figure of about 17 per cent. might have been reached.
But this is still impracticably high. Moreover, this would
replace purchase tax alone. If we wished to reduce income tax as
well, the level of a sales tax would have to be well above 20 per
The real trouble with this kind of approach, which inevitably
points to a very high rate of tax, is its assumption from the start
that the proposed sales tax has to be a major revenue-raiser for the
worked most successfully, it has been employed as an additional source
by WALTER TERRY
Party.
Once he was a non-starter. Today he is running well along the
track towards No. 10 Downing Street.
Laughable, they used to say. The man could hardly make a decent
speech, fluffing and floundering over a dreary brief.
BUT Mr. Lloyd as Prime Minister is ridiculous no more. The
first time in his political career, has made a tremendous impact on
the Tories of Westminster with his Budget.
of power a Tory leader has produced an alternative programme to
Butlerism.
For years many Conservatives, disgruntled but not quite clear
liberal, radical-type Toryism that Mr. Butler has inspired.
endurance (as proved over Suez), able also to produce new ideas that
Mr. Lloyd's timing has been miraculously fortunate. His Budget
was openly flouted by 69 Tories in the biggest Conservative revolt
since the war.
remarkable drop. Then into the limelight stepped Selwyn.
It is not only Mr. Butler, the deserving candidate for Downing
Street, who is in trouble. So are many other prominent contenders for
Mr. Edward Heath, Lord Privy Seal and Deputy Foreign
substance.
And Viscount Hailsham, a radical Tory even if he would
whimsically named Ministry for Science.
Cast a glance along the Right Wing: it is there that success lies
at the moment.
Commonwealth Office; and Mr Henry Brooke, the Minister of
Housing and Local Government is almost ready to take up the promotion
future. In about 18 months or so he will have to make it clear to the
THE Prime Minister has never given the slightest indication
who he considers should follow him in office.
It has always been presumed to be Mr. Butler. In everything
but title he is Deputy Premier. He holds the reins of power over
party and domestic policy.
But Mr. Butler's everlasting disadvantage has been the
undercurrent within the party against him. After Suez it rose to the
surface to rob him of the Premiership.
It still lies waiting (though Mr. Butler has been an able
fellow at winning friends over the years) for a chance to cheat him
again.
Right Wing, adored by Tory constituency parties, and an intimate of
authority as Mr. Butler ever had.
WHEN you think about it, Mr. Lloyd owes it all to Mr.
Macmillan. As Foreign Secretary he could have been sacked at any
time. Hardly anyone would have wept. Uphill, against current
thinking in the party, he was promoted Chancellor by the Prime
all?
There are plenty of Tories now who are ready to believe it. The
Prime Minister is not only very clever. He has an uncanny habit of
thinking years ahead of his colleagues.
INTIMATELY REVEALED... FRANCE'S MAN OF THE CENTURY... AND THE HOUR
HAS \de Gaulle lost his grip? Is the old chieftain who has
won so many battles and crushed so many revolts now to be eaten by the
was the young, defiant leader of the Free French, in Algiers on the
Has he the strength left now in 1961 to pull it off again? I
believe he has.
His power lies in his curious contradictions. He is, for
on to resist the French Army.
from the anti-clerical left.
He is often accused of being a dictator. And yet he is today
HIS INTEGRITY
THE greater part of the professional Army is ranged against
him. But there is no doubt that the concentrated strength of the
which no French soldier or civilian has commanded in this century.
Physically, he is a sick man. His sight is failing him; he
suffers from a cataract of both eyes. That is the principal reason
why he never speaks with notes; he couldn't read them if he had them.
He memorises all his speeches, and when he was in England in 1959
I congratulated him on his memory. He told me that it had always been
good ever since he studied philosophy at the Jesuit College in Paris,
before going to St. Cyr, the French Sandhurst.
Spectacles could do something for his eyesight, but he won't wear
soldier-father of the French people.
As the family man, the father who each Sunday visits the grave of
his daughter Anne in the medieval church of Colombey-les-deux-Eglises,
he is a figure which the ordinary Frenchman and Frenchwoman
That is why even the Communists, who number millions in France,
For the first time since 1945 the Communist, Socialist, and
Catholic trade unions have rallied in agreement. They will provide
which the inert mass of the French middle classes &mdash; the \attentistes
or fence sitters &mdash; are unlikely to offer and which \de Gaulle is
Like most supremely powerful men he believes in his destiny.
many times that he possesses the \baraka, an Arab word which
he learned from his father who was a teacher of philosophy at Lille.
made his position clear all his actions flow logically from that
position. It is certain that he would never yield to the blackmail of
the insubordinate generals.
HIS POLICY
IT is this strange mixture of mysticism and rational logic
which makes what is perhaps his most powerful contradiction.
As a rationalist (inherited from his father) he anticipated the
Algiers revolt by rallying the French people behind him, and making
people with their vested interest in peace.
The last word may well be with the Army &mdash; not the clique of
by JOHN HALL
buildings sitting on magnificent central sites, the man at the
other side of the desk was saying. Sites worth millions, asking for
with new money-spinners.
property tycoon.
most encouraging. In site after site all over the country there's a
Property tycoonery in the G.P.O. &mdash; what's happening?
Just this: After years of subservience the G.P.O. has been
liberated from the clutches of the Treasury. It is as free as makes
is Mr. Bevins' aim.
From here on we can call it the G.P.O., Ltd., and fall in
Bevins.
To them this 52-year-old ex-elementary schoolboy from Liverpool
is no longer the P.M.G. He is The Chairman. And with his
speech he looks the part too &mdash; executive director model.
competitive as if we had rivals breathing down our necks.
He means it. Almost before the Treasury ties had been severed he
Changing
THE odd telephone operator who snaps at us; the occasional
clerk behind the counter in the Post Office who glares when we fumble
be no segregation at the counters: no segregation in the sense that
whether we want stamps, postal orders, or both, we will be able to
march up to any station on the counter and get them from the same
assistant.
I asked about television &mdash; colour television.
nevertheless I urge that the particular problem of immigrants from any
source crowding into congested areas in London, Birmingham, and
This does not at present affect my own constituency of Leyton,
deplorable circumstances or by acquiring houses that could have been
occupied by those who have been waiting for reasonable accommodation
for many weary years.
to sleep in rows in the cellar! No wonder some returning immigrants
been compelled to live, even if they forget that is the plight also of
white brethren.
our economic needs, it is imperative to enforce dispersal of newcomers
to less congested areas and substantially to expand house-building.
Sir, &mdash; Nothing could illustrate the polarisation of the Labour
Party more aptly than the behaviour of Mrs Sylvia Brooks, who claims
speech I made as a guest speaker in Hornsey the other day. She
attributes to me the words ~The worst country under socialism is
the Labour Party will only flourish when it gets rid of people like
myself who consider freedom relatively unimportant.
reported in the Hornsey Journal which quotes me correctly as
saying: The last ten years have proved that the most backward
totalitarian form of socialism is superior to the decadent type of
communism is democratic socialism with planning and freedom combined.
The issue is whether we can get the people to see this in time.
Does Mrs Brooks think it really helps the Labour Party that she
misrepresentation? &mdash; Yours truly,
Sir, &mdash; Is not the Government's failure to convince the nation
present a policy with conviction, clarity, and imagination?
paid workers in ten years' time; the undertaking by Lord Robens
(broken this very morning); and the Prime Minister's repeated warnings
that the Common Market will demand real competitive pricing of our
products &mdash; and all this in the context of a pay pause?
why not invite us all to share it? Indeed, why does not the
the war?
The Government, too, must make up its mind as to whether we need
a stable economy or a fluctuating one, whether the cost of living is
to continue to rise (the promise of a &pound;20 minimum) or whether it
spend lavishly. For the present Government to ignore this aspect of
the situation is to create its own opposition on a far wider than
party scale, and can only lead to a defeat of its own half-hearted
appeals. &mdash; Yours etc.,
Holmbridge Vicarage, near Huddersfield.
raincoats are in the Post Office stores, waiting for the end of the
112 Wythenshawe Road,
BEA services in Scotland
quoted as saying of the Toothill Committee's report on BEA
I suspect that the waste-paper basket is Lord Douglas's filing
is it not the duty of a common carrier system which operates on a
distressed about the loss incurred by the Scottish service, why has
BEA been so reluctant to allow any other airlines an opportunity
to provide service?
The attitude of BEA towards internal service is reflected in
prospective Continental traveller. The internal passengers need a
native guide and the Gods on their side to find the booking counter
allotted to them. For Lord Douglas's information, Scotland extends
passenger can get from London to Edinburgh with only a little
Sir, &mdash; Mr R. H. S. Crossman proclaims, in his article in
Monday's issue of the Guardian: The white-washing of
Hitler and never believed in the possibility of a general peace
On Tuesday, March 23, 1942, the Joint Consultation Board of
Standard Telephone and Cables held its fourth ordinary meeting.
stations be established around the coast before the next April.
It would seem, therefore, that Chamberlain did not trust Hitler;
post-Oswestry, and cosy Liberal optimism it will be some years yet
now sprinkled in all three parties, may one day be united and that the
Liberal Party may find itself the anchor of a new radical alliance? &mdash;
Young Liberals.
Sir, &mdash; If Mr. Corina wishes to make two mutually exclusive
journal in the same month. On November 9 he states: Since price
markets. This must mean that he believes that the advent of price
restraint in 1957 (the Voluntary Price Regulation Scheme) resulted in
twelve days later he states: In the period 1957-59 the volume of
exports fell by 1.2 per cent. At least one of the propositions
must be incorrect.
Mr. Corina says that the Hinchliffe Report showed quite
clearly that between 1949-50 and 1959-60 the total cost of the
reference in the report &mdash; which is hardly surprising as it was
belief that the cost of the pharmaceutical service is increasing at a
much faster rate than that of other branches of the National Health
Service or that it is absorbing an increasing share in the total cost
of the Service.
If the rise in the drug bill is phenomenal the rise in the
at the University College of North Staffordshire states: Between
social service expenditure from 28 per cent to 23 per cent, and as a
Far from being extravagant, expenditure on NHS has been less
conclusion on the drug bill: It would seem that much of the furore
Ronald C. Clark, Director
Smith Kline and French
seeking export trade, I have often criticised the lack of facilities
For a change I would like to pay tribute to our embassies in
Spain and Portugal for providing examples of just what can be done to
my efforts to promote new trade were actively supported by the British
Ambassadors, who not only saw to it that my visits were widely known
there was official British representation at all levels, and I was
embassy personnel and first-rate Spanish agents demonstrated to me for
the first time in my long experience just what 100 per cent
co-ordination can achieve. Surely what can be accomplished in Spain
Slip Group of Companies.
Letters to the Editor
Sir, &mdash; Mr. Aucott (August 21) implies that all expenses
incurred by directors on behalf of their companies should be disclosed
they were not wholly exclusively and necessarily incurred &mdash; then
exclusively and necessarily incurred they were plainly not
Mr. Aucott is not, I hope, suggesting that the standards of
honesty in British companies today are such as to require that every
J. F. STADDON,
Secretary,
Institute of Directors.
10, Belgrave Square, S.W.1.
Exports on a Plateau
that the Chancellor's measures are sensible and correct and are likely
to restrict sales in the home market in order to increase exports are
quite mistaken and are having the opposite result. There is already
ample statistical evidence available to prove this is the case.
to state the alternative which a considerable number of people believe
infinitely preferable to the present patchwork and uneffective
The Chancellor must take steps to curtail inessential exports.
It is perfectly ridiculous in the present serious situation to allow
rubbish and things we could perfectly well do without. The most
off availability of foreign exchange to people who would use it to
create an overseas investment which would ultimately yield a return
instead of cutting it off to people who would merely waste it in
buying a lot of rubbish.
N. F. T. SAUNDERS,
Managing Director,
Kelvinator.
Butter Dumping
Sir, &mdash; I was interested to read the article by your Commercial
Editor on butter (August 21). I ought not to have to express my
ignorance to such a degree, but I find it very difficult to understand
how it is possible for another country to invoke anti-dumping
taxpayers and consumers, together with our own farmers?
both Denmark and New Zealand, is that anti-dumping legislation is
primarily designed to protect a country's home industry, and it would
and companies are permitted to apply for discriminatory action in
their mutual overseas markets. Should we join the Common Market, it
is appreciated that dumping will be prohibited between members, but
this is quite a different problem from that now raised by Denmark and
M. C. BENTALL.
Rochdale.
Potato Acreage
the Potato Marketing Board, and in that capacity he is well aware of
nor consumers, as was well shown in the years before the Board was set
up.
Of course it is not possible for the Board, by its quota
prescriptions, to plan for an exact acreage. There are too many
factors which affect farmers' own intentions for any quota laid down
responsibilities if it did not exercise the powers conferred on it by
the Potato Marketing Scheme to assist growers to plan their production
Mr. Merricks is also aware that &pound;1m. a year from the
increased contributions would go to meet the Board's share of the
encourage greater stability in acreage and prices as between one year
and another. It is difficult to see how amendments to the Scheme
Basic Acreage Committee,
Potato Marketing Board.
Norfolk House Farm,
Building Bricks
Sir, &mdash; In reply to the article in THE FINANCIAL TIMES of
August 3 re building bricks, the Scottish brick works have about
There is a freight opening for British Railways, 120m. tons, if
the price were right.
Composition bricks are imported from Belgium and distributed to
G. R. NICOLL.
Letters to the Editor
The Airlines
Sir, &mdash; With reference to your leading article of August 23, the
is not, therefore, possible to lower fares appreciably and so widen
the market with these aircraft.
with the additional difficulty that the sectors are so short that the
aircraft cannot get down anywhere near to the best point on the
range-cost graph. These airlines have ordered aircraft which only get
down to the best position at 1,000 miles and in many cases the
300-400 miles it is off the graph at the bottom end resulting in costs
had been configured differently, cost of 1.5 cents would have been
So airlines have only themselves to blame if air does not secure
a bigger part of the apparently static common carrier market due in
66, Sloane Street, S.W1.
habit survives of prescribing small quantities of drugs, bandages,
addition, patients have often to wait a long time, up to two hours,
Issuing such small prescriptions, which of course were originally
to whom time was of little value. To-day, the N.H.S., the
wages while waiting, would be better off if the latter were simply
instructed to obtain small quantities of simple supplies at the
chemists. It is, of course, not suggested that this method should be
the hospital dispensary freed from petty orders could be concentrated.
HANS A. BLUM.
Sir, &mdash; I presume that Mr. G. H. Woolveridge's letter
reason that I do not think it should be allowed to pass without
comment.
per cent. he receives is excessive.
Fourthly, in my opinion H.P. charges have gone up by 1 1/2
per cent. flat even though commission has gone down.
Fifthly, can Mr. Woolveridge publish the rebate scales used by
At least one F.H.A. member charges many &pound;s extra for early
say that finance houses would lose money if they gave a bigger rebate
in such cases.
recording of monthly instalments and do not have to make provision for
bad debts or make enquiries about the integrity and standing of their
customers.
J. E. FOSTER.
26, Boyle Avenue,
Stanmore.
Polythene Bags
taken, in order to avoid accidents as a result of misuse of the
become suffocated if polythene bags are placed over their heads.
Prevention of Accidents, in order to determine methods of publicising
both the dangers and the recommended preventive measures.
many forms, such as small bags, there is no need for any particular
precautions, but with larger bags and sheets, and in particular where
realised that such bags, and also those used for the packaging of a
large number of garments, are useful in the home. If, therefore,
these bags are retained, in order to use them from time to time for
storage purposes, they should be kept out of the reach of children.
recommendation of the film manufacturers, and the above mentioned
children.
A. R. THOM,
Chairman,
P.O. Box 121,
Sheffield 10.
Exports of Capital
Sir, &mdash; It is evident that the succour provided by the
foreign countries, transfers them to the I.M.F., but
For the future, it is important that any move on the part of British
of the impetus set in motion by entry into the Common Market should
not constitute a further drain on reserves.
THE PRESIDENT'S SPEECH
Sir, &mdash; We are much indebted to The Times for publishing
yesterday, in full, the broadcast of the President of the United
States to his people &mdash; and to the world &mdash; an account of his recent
visit to Europe.
voice and an authority to the councils of the Free World &mdash; and outside
it &mdash; that speaks in frank, clear, and unambiguous terms, enabling
immediately after &mdash; the war.
HENRY MORRIS-JONES.
REPEATED INTERFERENCE
Sir, &mdash; Mr. Kelf-Cohen, in his letter to you published on June
Salaried Staffs' Association's annual conference in regard to the
the present attitude of the Government precluded the possibility of an
integrated and coordinated transport system, which conference believed
policy of integration, the Government had made it impossible for the
commission to pay its way.
In speaking to the resolution I quoted from the leading article
article stated that: ~Disintegration is being carried too far. In
1930s. The article added: The plan will put the railways in the
position of splendid isolation, except for pipelines, which is
transport.
The payment of proper remuneration is generally regarded as the
first charge on an industry: Mr. Kelf-Cohen appears to regard it
Mr. Kelf-Cohen asks if the members of the association are now
him for &pound;162 per annum (&pound;370-&pound;208)?
rates of pay, and it was they who had been providing the subsidy
W. J. P. WEBBER, General Secretary,
OPENING PAIRS
L. Bradell about 104 not out. There were only six or eight extras.
Sir, &mdash; Several of your correspondents on this subject have put
forward the view that, over the passing years, there has been a
gradual increase in difficulty in university honours courses in
mathematics, and that their content is now less suitable for intending
years in the character of the mathematics taught in British
main change has been a move away from the mathematical jugglery
referred to by one of your correspondents to a more logical study of
question at present set is in fact easier, in that it demands less in
common 50 years ago. One would like to claim also that present-day
Because of the use of special terminologies, the newer
mathematical subjects may be meaningless to teachers in the schools
(or even to some university mathematicians), but this does not
necessarily make them harder for the student. The present-day student
example, but finds difficulty with questions on older disciplines such
is especially true of abstract algebra and set theory, which should
logical processes and in this way should improve his skill as a
teacher.
In conclusion, although I believe that university courses have
benefited, and that students' lives have been made easier, by the
reduction in the demands on manipulative jugglery, the pendulum
should not be omitted from university courses, but which should form
R. A. RANKIN.
Department of Mathematics, The University, Glasgow.
COOPERATION IN EUROPE
TO THE EDITOR OF THE TIMES
signing the Rome Treaty or associating themselves with the Common
Market until arrangements have been made to ensure that the
Commonwealth does not suffer thereby.
Yours, &c.,
JOHN DUGDALE, ROBIN TURTON, ARTHUR CREECH JONES, ROBERT
BAXTER, ARTHUR HENDERSON, RONALD RUSSELL, DOUGLAS JAY, PATRICK WALL,
STATEMENT ON KENYA
the Colonies actually meant when he said of Kenya: ~I am sure that
Having just paid a visit to Kenya and having met and talked with
(1) releasing Mr. Kenyatta as soon as possible in the hope that this
will strengthen the Government now in office and lead to a settling of
towards the end of 1962 or the beginning of 1963. With this, I am
To give independence overnight too quickly would be a disservice
to Kenya in general and to the future stability of the African
administration in particular.
On the other hand to wait too long cannot serve the economic or
population in Kenya and they accept this; and it will not enable the
Mr. Macleod has a difficult decision to make on timing. In the
interests of Kenya political leaders in Kenya, both British and
African, and political representatives in both Houses of Parliament at
If all parties in Kenya can have such a mind then all will be well
African will play a part.
K. LEWIS.
House of Commons, June 8.
Sir, &mdash; Lord Salisbury, in his letter on June 8, wisely draws our
attention to the statement by the Secretary of State for the Colonies
on constitutional advance in Kenya. He finds satisfaction in the
the economic circumstances in Kenya.
take place. Having said that, it must be made clear to every
interested person that the economic situation cannot, and must not, be
used as a brake on constitutional progress. The deteriorating
constitutional uncertainty, among other factors. The economic
African Prime Minister and an African majority in the Council of
Ministers, with popular support, is in effective leadership of the
country.
settled before full independence can come, and here the needs of all
the races must be faithfully considered. But his Excellency the
Governor was surely right in his speech at the opening of the present
the encouraging formation of a Government under the Lancaster House
possible and probable.
R. ELLIOTT KENDALL, Head of the Methodist Church in Kenya.
10, Ravine Road, Boscombe, Hampshire.
Sir, &mdash; In providing information for your Special Correspondent
prescriptions written by hospital doctors. This was never my
intention and such an interpretation is possible because my remarks
used solely in a consultative capacity in recommending treatment for
situation can be realized by the use of E.C.10(H.P.) forms
written by hospital doctors and dispensed by retail pharmacists. It
G. BRYAN, Chief Pharmacist.
Sir, &mdash; May I, as one of the younger generation to whom Sir
Thomas Moore on June 7 addressed a lesson in Spanish history, be
permitted to comment on some of the points he raised?
Sir Thomas's history is clearly partial. He claims that in
1938-39 Spain was in convulsion and that Franco created order from
July is a traditional month for economic crises, and the
beginning of the period of seasonal weakness for sterling. In 1955,
1957 and 1961 it has also been the month in which the Government has
chosen to create a national sense of economic anxiety. In fact, this
time the recognition of the crisis comes surprisingly late, for
Britain's trading position deteriorated sharply last year, and is now
getting slightly better rather than worse.
The Government's propaganda may indeed have over-reached itself.
Undoubtedly the CHANCELLOR'S speeches, and the PRIME MINISTER'S blunt
warnings to the 1922 Committee, were intended to prepare the nation
and the Conservative Party for strong measures to put the economy
right. These warnings, however, have run too far ahead of action.
of emergency than of urgency.
failure to find Britain's proper international position in the
but it has failed to explain to the nation any consistent and
carry the nation along with it.
The economic measures which are going to be introduced will need
to be tough, and must be judged primarily by their effectiveness; but
years has been wholly bad in its social effects. The sacrifices that
by any one section of it.
later, if they can see a clear objective which sacrifices will help to
achieve, and if those sacrifices fall as heavily on the private sector
as on the workers.
Liking Yuri
conventional Anglo-Soviet attitudes. After all, he arrived here hard
on the heels of Mr. Khrushchev's declaration that Russia must spend
were not ideal heralds.
What in fact Major Gagarin seems to have done is to have shown us
how much we want to like the Russians, in a spirit of genuine
neighbourliness.
This, and the fact that British visitors to Russia usually find a
reciprocal warmth of welcome there, is surely a portent worth noting
by the political leaders on both sides.
Giant of the Left
his Transport and General Workers' Union for the lost-cause campaign
of unilateralism is a personal triumph, though it is fortunately
But the Brighton conference at which he won a 3 to 1 victory is
important for other reasons. The extent of the personality cult which
unblushingly declared: I feel like a dwarf in the shadow of a great
man.
well-disciplined members, is now held firmly in the Left hand of Mr.
comfortably in the wake of the reigning giant.
South Bank Puzzles
Theatre is wholly commendable. But it is clear from the latest
proposals that the problems involved have not been adequately thought
out; when the Council meets on Tuesday to consider the report of its
Theatre on the South Bank entirely changes the whole picture. In a
Hayward said that it may be necessary to think of three auditoriums.
There is no question of may: such an extension will be quite
of what it should be.
In any case the whole building will have to be redesigned.
twelve years old. If the new proposals are accepted, the design of
might emerge at last of which Britain could be proud.
The Council might also think it wise to ask the Chancellor for a
clarification of his statement that his subsidy would be limited to
1,000th Refugee
refugees resettled since the first humanitarian impulse of the Year,
Most have come from the hard core of physically or socially
still to come before the limit set by the Government is reached. But
what then? There are still 80,000 unsettled refugees in Europe.
Britain can be proud of the new impetus she has helped to give to
returned to their camps. But we cannot deny responsibility for the
mental as well as the physical condition of those left rootless for
MOST doctors will agree with the Minister of Health that
as intelligent persons. Most will say that they do tell the
will invariably add, when pressed, that there are others who are not
so forthcoming, so frank or thoughtful.
What Mr. Powell calls, in modern jargon, the failure of
communication is a fact of the medical service, particularly in
hospitals, that is not the fault of any small minority. It has
persisted into these frank-speaking days as a result of a professional
It is usually justified on the grounds that a little
knowledge can be harmful. But, as the Minister says the failure
to speak two sentences can cause deep antagonism. Training in
THE British are a realistic people who do not always choose
but a number of crises with an almost desperate complacency. For a
few days, a nine-day wonder, it seemed that the economic crisis was
really penetrating the national consciousness. But by the end of last
equanimity; even the Stock Exchange was edging upwards.
than could be said of the impending decision on the Common Market, and
make since the war; yet no one could claim that the public debate has
could probably go in or stay out without vitally offending either its
is the gravest of the three crises, one on which the issue of peace or
war could turn. The British Government has from the beginning sought
that the people of West Berlin cannot be abandoned. Yet the national
attitude seems almost to be that Berlin is not to be allowed to
interfere with the summer holidays.
This complacency is a poor basis for policy; and a poor
substitute for that sense of moral purpose for which the PRIME
MINISTER and the CHANCELLOR have appealed.
The economy, Berlin, the Common Market &mdash; here are three issues
over the impracticability of a National Government. The British
system has never taken kindly to government by Coalition, which is
certainly not the answer now; but almost as disturbing as the national
Party Views Not Far Apart
YET even in the economic field, where the division is widest,
political credit, the judgment and sentiment of the party leaders are
Europe it seems almost certain that Mr. GAITSKELL would find himself
moving along the present line of policy if he were Prime Minister.
(He would be foolish to risk splitting his party in Opposition;
them.) On Berlin again the responsible Labour Party view and the
Conservative view are so close as to be indistinguishable.
peace &mdash; an influence more necessary now than it has been for years.
in wartime. These differences need to be reconsidered.
Yet the greater weakness is perhaps the failure to waken the
British people. When great issues are shirked, little differences are
given more than their proper weight. The call to national unity and
the call for national leadership perhaps come in the end to much the
WHAT exactly are the Americans up to? Have they actually
calculated all the consequences of what they are doing with their
If so, what is the point of it all? Will these American moves
really strike the world as a sign of strength &mdash; or as a gesture of
weakness and frustration?
It is true that there is cause for frustration. With their
nuclear tests the Russians are behaving like lunatic children.
and childish.
A single shell fired accidentally in Berlin by some unthinking
youth from Texas or the Ukraine could now destroy humanity quite as
inevitably as any 50-megaton bomb.
The British Government's urgent task is to stop the border
Call it off!
CAN the Government possibly persist in its plans for the
Ghana about possible violence during the Queen's visit.
by their own experts show no cause for concern.
Are bombs not facts? Is an explosion on the very spot where the
happen?
concealed the warnings. If they did not, it is a sad reflection on
Our Royal Family has always been ready to take risks for a good
purpose. But for what purpose are risks to be taken in Ghana?
Merely to bolster up a petty, tottering dictator.
It would be little short of criminal if any life were risked in
The brave servant
She was aware too that during her ceremonial drive with Nkrumah
it would have been easy for an assassin's bullet to have struck the
wrong target.
people of Ghana. She has gone ahead with her tour.
Nothing could have been easier for her than to cancel this
Prime Minister. No one would have been surprised if the visit had
been cancelled. Everyone would have understood.
The Queen has shown many times before that she is a dedicated
and sincere servant of her people throughout the world. Now she has
displayed, as well, the highest form of courage in grave physical
danger.
the 150th anniversary of the foundation of his mighty industrial
have been broken up long ago. There would have been nothing to
But Krupp, the convicted war criminal, the employer of slave
labour, has succeeded year after year in getting an extension of his
power centre of German militarism intact.
How much longer is our Government going to be content with just a
Answer this today
COMMONWEALTH Governments are at last to see in full a
speech which Mr. Edward Heath made more than a month ago.
Not because it was on a question which vitally affects their
Not because they are members of an association the first and most
Cabinet, are loyal Ministers of the same Queen.
The only reason they are going to be allowed to see it is
the whole thing to another foreign Government.
But there is something even more shameful.
copies of the speech was because the British Government requested
it.
THE final curtain comes down on the tragic farce of O'Brien
Five months ago Dr. Conor Cruise O'Brien came bouncing into the
He had even coined a phrase for the colonialists whom he scorned
most. He called us the Brits.
of UNO must inevitably be more enlightened, decent, and
Well, how has he done in Africa himself?
bloodshed, intolerance and racial hatred than almost any other man in
recent African history.
As he looks at the mess he has left behind he must wonder how
Repeal it
Last week Edwin David Sims was found guilty of the horrible
will go down in the records as manslaughter.
It will help the experts to claim that the rise in the
And that is not all.
Is it not a scandal that a law which allows this to happen should
Brussels over the Common Market tariffs.
Germans retort that wine must not flow only in one direction. If
What is true of wine is equally true of one industry after
have of theirs.
To the old and the lonely a card is a wonderful reminder that
And to the relation or neighbour you have quarrelled with it is
the most tactful peace offering of all.
They go, the Government piously points out, on special terms
only.
On each bomb there is virtually a label saying: Not to be used
except against pirate planes and air-strips.
Does it have any control over the Indian airmen who are going to
drop the bombs? Is there the slightest evidence that they either know
as deluded and hysterical as their former chief, Conor O'Brien.
hospitals and British missionaries.
No wonder the Tory rebels are in uproar. The only surprise is
that there should be a single Tory M.P. who is prepared to
Prigs
THE nuclear disarmament rioters who have been causing so
much annoyance say that this is the only way in which they can stir
The truth is that their fellow-countrymen have not got less
conscience. Just more sense.
year. Suppose that both East and West had given up their nuclear
Is it not certain that we would already be in the midst of the
most terrible conventional war in history over Berlin?
THE Treasury is right to save money by clamping down on
embassy parties for the Queen's official birthday.
But the saving is only &pound;100,000 a year. Why stop there?
giving to Tanganyika.
There is the Congo which, through our backing for UNO, is
costing us around &pound;4,000,000 a year.
And, of course, there is the Army on the Rhine. It is costing us
&pound;100,000,000.
anxious for Britain to play a leading world role.
But they should remember this: true authority comes from
strength, not from pouring money down the drain.
Wrong
DO you remember the debtors prisons in the novels of
Charles Dickens?
Probably you associate them with the workhouse and with child
The cells should be reserved for criminals alone.
understand that, if you lend to someone whose credit is not good, then
you must be prepared to lose.
A moment ago, in the foyer of the Leopold 2 Hotel, where we
are writing, they carried in a four-year-old girl. She was dead.
In the moments it has taken to type this they have brought in
yet another child's body. The face is gone, the body shredded by
war on the world?
Was it because their country was employing white officers?
No. Every other African State has whites in top positions. Even
the Indian airmen who killed them were white-trained.
Let's give the Welfare State a shot in the arm
By KENNETH BARRETT
INCREASED National Health charges. A further conjuring trick
with National Insurance contributions. The Minister of Health's
announcement the other day of changes to take place in April was a
personal security.
There have been other signs of this retreat over the years. To
many of us it has long been evident that the Welfare State was in
First of all, the administrators have muddled one of the main
have insisted that part of the National Insurance stamp should go
towards the cost of the National Health Service.
This has deepened the widest-spread fallacy in the community &mdash;
year will be about &pound;867,000,000. Of that vast sum, &pound;663,000,000
comes from general taxation, not from National Insurance stamps.
Because the existence of the stamp as a source of supplementary
administrator in search of the appearance of economy.
It gives him a chance to make the Health Service look as if it
costs less.
bill of social security in his weekly stamp. Of that, 1s 10 1/2d.
amount of 1s. 10 1/2d. will go to the health service.
At the same time, from April, he will have to pay, if his wages
confusing graduated pension scheme, unless his employer contracts
out.
The Minister of Health's proposals will alter the position again
in July.
His total basic contribution will be 10s. 7d.
Of this a larger proportion, 2s. 8 1/2d. this time, will be
earmarked for the health service.
stamp will cost him 15s. 8d.
Don't think for one moment that it's going to stop there.
Higher pensions will be sought. The health service will cost
more. The contributions, total and fraction, will all go up again.
The mere cost of the complex administrative tasks involved in
recording contributions is vast in proportion to the amount of tax
Enemy
But the health service has another inside enemy.
people a little when they get some special extra benefit.
pay a little extra out of their own pockets?
It's an insidious argument. It seems so reasonable. But once
extreme lengths of unreason.
And yet a widow, whose pension, for which her husband paid, is
wiped out because she works for a living wage, will now have to pay
12s. 6d. for each lens in her spectacles, and 17s. 8d. for the
frames. This is what the Minister proposes.
charges under a vastly expensive public scheme.
You can only alter the shape of the national bill.
But, at least, it ought to be a Minister's duty to refrain from
doing positive harm just to collect a token tribute to the total
tally.
And social harm, I fear, is what two of the proposed changes are
For example, from March 1, each item on a National Health Service
prescription is to cost 2s.
Children
than 2s.
constant ill-health. There are countless thousands of them.
The retired folk, getting on in years, with their retirement
pensions and &pound;3 or so a week from their old firms.
The man who, in protracted illness, receives half-pay from his
They may need half a dozen prescribed items a week, easily.
It is shameful that such a levy should be collected by a
The last war forced the state to protect the health of children
through the Maternity Clinic.
possession beyond price.
All mothers go there. The solicitor's wife, the schoolmaster's
who is doing a stretch in gaol.
infantile mortality been so low.
The orange juice will be 1s. 6d., the cod liver oil 1s.,
These sums might have been deliberately fixed to keep the poorest
sort of mother away. And it will be the child that suffers in health.
By these particularly petty tactics, the Minister will save
&pound;1,500,000 out of the &pound;800,000,000 and more that we have to pay.
SLASH THIS HEALTH SERVICE RED TAPE
YOU will have noticed the fierce House of Commons rumpus over
the proposed Health Service changes and charges. I gave my views in
detail about these last Sunday. It seems from the size and shape of
The Act of 1946 defines his vision. It gives the Health
secure improvement in the physical and mental health of the people...
and the prevention, diagnosis and treatment of illness.
To the creators of the service there was no hesitation about one
How far have these great objectives been achieved?
DOCTOR'S MERCY
No longer does a deduction from the wages of the lower-paid
to the mercy of the family purse or the doctor's kindness.
associations seeking to ensure some kind of medical treatment for
own doctors.
The best doctors, it was alleged, would stay resentfully out of
All these were myths created by prejudice. Within three months
of the appointed day under the Act, 39,000,000 were on Health Service
It is officially estimated today that 97 per cent of Britain's
inhabitants are using the Health Service.
can disappear in the difficulties of departmentalism.
Today, Regional Hospital Boards plan hospital and consultant
services. Management committees administer hospitals at local level.
Executive councils are responsible for the general practitioner, the
dentist, the supply of drugs.
The local health authority looks after maternity services, child
MINISTER'S JUNGLE
The hospital service, the general medical service, the local
authority, each tends to work in isolation.
hospital.
Often there is no follow-up system from the hospital to the home,
patient to another branch of the system of National Health.
as though they were isolated problems. Of course, they are all
interdependent.
the financial burden on the local hospital.
More money spent on local authority dental services when the
children are at school keeps down the bill of the general dental
sickness.
To take one illustration. Hospitals are given a certain amount
During the last month or two, therefore, of the arbitrary annual
accountancy, there is a mad rush to spend anything left in the kitty.
unreasonable.
ever-rising and very significant part of the bill. Let's look at it.
Last year 214,000,000 National Health Service prescriptions were
made up. Goodness knows how many unidentifiable pills linger in
down the sink after the first distasteful dose.
Five prescriptions a head last year, for everyone in the United
Kingdom at nearly 7s. a go!
The bill still goes up. Not primarily because doctors prescribe
THE Government is going to have a hard job defending its
Chief Justice Ellesmere declared that James 1 was one entire king
over all his subjects in whichsoever of his dominions they were
Of Britain's right to change this policy there can be no
question: she is the only Commonwealth member who has not so far acted
is primarily a problem of colour: the need for control was never
recently, they were. A nauseous campaign waged by a group of Tory
immigration; and it is unfortunate that the Home Secretary waited to
make his formal announcement until the end of an unpleasant (though by
Brighton. Hence the need to disentangle the facts from the racial
prejudices which have obscured them.
Voluntary control
Commonwealth was negligible; and the permanent coloured population was
less than 50,000. The largest intake was from the West Indies,
The great wave of West Indians started in 1954 with 10,000
immigrants; by 1960 the figure had risen to more than 54,000; and the
estimated figure for this year is likely to reach 70,000. This great
increase is due to fear of immigration controls. There are now about
200,000 West Indians (mainly Jamaicans) in Britain.
There is, however, another factor which weighed perhaps more
heavily with the Government's decision to introduce some form of
control. In the past the Governments of both India and Pakistan
Britain. This system worked well until last year. The net inward
movement of Indians never exceeded 6,600; in 1959 it was down to
2,900. In the first eight months of this year, however, it reached
13,500.
For Pakistan, the highest figure was 5,200 in 1957, which dropped
to 2,500 in 1960. But in the first eight months of this year it rose
It is difficult to find exact figures of non-coloured immigrants
because many people from Australia, New Zealand, Canada and South
of the Irish, they are a negligible proportion of the total figure.
permits) rose from about 45,800 in 1959 to just over 53,000 last year.
Public services
What conclusions can be drawn from these figures? There is
first the overall picture of an expanding working population, with
immigration accelerating, emigration decelerating (230,000 in 1957,
Indians. The same is true of many public services, particularly in
But there are clearly other factors which must be considered. As
its own volition. The reality of the world to-day is of unequal
Commonwealth all other countries control immigration. The West Indian
(especially Australia) discriminate against non-whites. The United
States and Latin America have also recently tightened up their
be allowed to find its own level without any attempt at planning?
failure of plan has produced a large surplus of unskilled and
voluntary system of controls), can we believe that racial and social
Even though the real problems have become obscured by the
discussion.
Mr. Butler has firmly rejected the idea of any controls based
on discrimination. He has made the reasonable suggestion that people
immigrants with bad criminal records in this country might be
deported. He has also suggested that it might be desirable to relate
What should concern us is how this policy is to be administered, and
whether in fact it can be administered without racial discrimination.
Since the majority of immigrants to-day are coloured, it will be
Commonwealth, and possibly her future allies in the Common Market as
well. For it is not only a question of deciding how best to arrange
for immigration to continue into Britain; it is equally important to
of the Commonwealth if she abandons her open door policy. We
worthy of special praise. Our own economy has benefited enormously
from immigration.
Nor must we think of ourselves as being uniquely generous.
Algerian troubles than anything we have so far had to face. Holland,
Also we must remember that even if the coloured immigrants in
this country should reach 500,000 in the next year or two, they would
comprise only 1 per cent. of our total population. To shirk from
But the problem of absorbing immigrants harmoniously into
One of the important conclusions reached by Mr. James Wickenden in
to lie where a concentration of immigrants has formed too quickly
for an area's capacity to absorb them. Where this occurs there has
present. As a short term measure it is therefore surely desirable to
hospitality and security can be offered to the newcomers. It is with
RUSSIA TO-DAY
WHY MR. K IS OUT OF DATE
in the new party programme, but the Russian people are not likely to
be satisfied with material progress alone.
WHAT Mr. Khrushchev was talking about in the Kremlin last
should be thankful. It was not Utopian either. It was, rather, a
Soviet Union. That Mr. Khrushchev should be able to think of it in
He was introducing the new Party Programme to the Twenty-second
Party Congress, convened to approve his development plans for the next
material promises are realised the whole concept will have become
irrelevant, overtaken by events; or, to use Mr. Khrushchev's own
insufficiencies of his present thinking.
advances, or that these are not necessary. Indeed, they are highly
advanced nations of the West. For the West is also moving, and a
visualising any forward movement outside the Soviet Union. He says,
workers, who are also, some time in the next two decades, to receive
now have a secondary or higher education: by 1981 all children are to
goal of free medical treatment and hospitalisation for all, as well as
free rents, will be reached.
All this, with a reduction of working hours, is designed to bring
about in the next twenty years a living standard higher than that of
any capitalist country. For the first time in history, Mr.
Khrushchev said, insufficiency would be fully and finally eliminated:
no capitalist country, he asserted, could set itself this task. But
Productivity only
down the Stalinist paralysis (somebody had to do it) and setting the
Soviet Union on the road to material prosperity after the negative
horrors of the cruel years.
article on Persia last Sunday, meaning a man who would pave the way
comrades and could overcome the hesitations of Socialist leaders
the vast majority of Socialists &mdash; tantamount to a majority of the
The darlings of democracy today are the men who, long after the
country to them: Benes surrendering Czechoslovakia, Roosevelt giving
them half of Europe, Truman and Attlee abandoning China to its mild
of its most unhesitating and determined enemies for 44 years, and what
Mikhailovich, nor Chiang) but a nice Western-style statesman with
&ast;&ast;&ast; Alexander Kerensky, Prime Minister of Russia between the
Sir &mdash; My article, Russia's Southern Doorstep, had to be
condensed for reasons of space, and in the process a slight but
important change occurred. It reads: In so far as the United
States has hitherto been the protector of the r&eacute;gime, the people
tend to be emotionally anti-Western....
emotionally anti-Western.
matter of opinion. There can be no doubt that there are millions of
Persians who are devoted to the Shah, and have no hostility to the
Religion at Redbrick
Points from readers' letters
Apathy is prevalent throughout the University, not merely among
Christians. Indeed it is a most interesting sign that so many
non-Christians look to Christians for a lead. In societies and on
be 500, of which at least 300 attend with some degree of regularity. &mdash;
(Miss) Hilary M. Gray, Ex-Sec., Joint Christian Committee.
Southampton University.
One look at the University newspaper would show how largely the
here.
We personally were attracted by the friendly, unbiased atmosphere
social occasion which gives one the opportunity of meeting one's
Among our acquaintances at the corporate communion mentioned by
Inquirer, very few were not present at Jazz Club the previous
evening. Jazz does not exclude religion. &mdash; Elizabeth A. Bunn;
Judith M. Steel; Jennifer Summers, Southampton.
When I went to the University sermon in the University church
here, St. George's, Bloomsbury, on April 30, advertised as at 8.0
to an obscure seat at the side.
If you want to be certain of a seat at the London University
sermon, you have to go to Evensong first.
The sermon was about Pascal, no doubt an interesting modern
London, N.W.1.
potatoes sold to the board had been left to rot in clamps and that in
general they had removed such stocks before deterioration
deteriorated?
But the most surprising of all his statements must be that the
question of compensation for deterioration does not arise as the
refused by the Board.
How can the Board buy potatoes under contract and not own them?
Exotic Chelsea
Sir &mdash; Would it not be possible slightly to change the date of
by the azaleas and the rhododendrons? They are not a typically
show, by waiting two or three weeks, would achieve effects more
popular and more subtle.
could be put in a wider context.
Surely people nowadays are aware of the benefits (particularly
Certainly it might be argued that the political and economic division
of Ireland perpetuates traditional animosities which are now largely
Perhaps a more integrated Ireland would be feasible within the
wider framework of the Commonwealth or the Common Market.
me to ask for your readers' experiences.
The Consumers' Advisory Council is at present consulting various
manufacturers with a view to agreeing model guarantee terms, fair to
It would help over both these projects if your readers would tell
us if they have ever suffered injury or damage from a defect in goods
manufacturer owing to exclusion clauses in the guarantee. If
better.
D. R. VICKERS,
Sec., Consumers' Advisory Council.
I agree with him that it depends on the individual. The thing
need for concentration.
also a 135 m.p.h. Aston Martin. I claim that in spite of my age
it is certainly not necessary for me to give up these exciting cars.
these cars all my life. This is the main point really.
RAC Competitions Committee.
London, W.1.
Sir &mdash; You may print what you like in your entertaining Sunday
Den Staatsanwalt (the correct title of which is, incidentally,
The film was made in Western Germany, although it is true that
the director, Wolfgang Staudte, has worked for the East German
DEFA, and therefore, in some eyes, may be politically
Roses for the Prosecutor is merely one of many new West
at their Establishment &mdash; a very healthy sign in German films in view
London, S.W.4.
trips abroad, raises an issue that has been avoided for years.
accept invitations from foreign Governments, or from public relations
organisations working for them, without being compromised.
In any case, you tend to become inhibited or you have to be very
thick-skinned to the point of rudeness. And if you end up taking the
opposing view to the one you are supposed to have taken, it cannot
help but leave bad blood.
Thus I have declined a number of invitations from foreign
The existing parliamentary bodies arranging trips abroad, like
lifetime of a single Parliament, either in one or two major journeys
Only in this way can we hope to enable the House of Commons to
have independent, first-hand impressions of many problems affecting
DESMOND DONNELLY.
House of Commons.
one would find in commerce, the Church, or even the Press. Without
Germany, Central Africa, or anywhere else.
In the light of post-war history, which reached its tragic
agreement on atomic disarmament, there must be some excuse for the
signs a peace treaty with East Germany. According to a Foreign
Ministry spokesman in Paris, there have been no official
communications or conversations between the Soviet leaders and the
German Ambassador. Nevertheless, the proposals which were made public
yesterday do seem to serve as a basis upon which to resume
This is the willingness of Mr. Kruschev to waive his earlier
are worth considering. It is reasonable to assume that part of the
spirited reaction of the so-called uncommitted nations to the gigantic
exercise in atomic explosions carried out by the Russians. Mr.
Kruschev and his friends have succeeded in shocking a large part of
the world that might have been more friendly towards them by their
threatened the health of the whole world, not least the Russian people
might.
negotiation is the only way he can attain his ends short of war, on
reach agreement on a new status for West Berlin which guarantees the
freedom of its inhabitants and the freedom of its communications with
may feel towards West Germany, a time will come when a divided
West. There is only one alternative, and that, again, is war. Or
has been suggested in several countries. Berlin could be an
independent city and used as a home for the United Nations. It is
root of all these problems and they must be satisfied with whatever
Spiritual values
WHEN Mr. Butler opened a new social sciences building at
Nottingham University yesterday he discussed a problem which is
important to us all and one that has exercised his consideration for
the increasing tempo of materialism.
It is, of course, this aspect of the matter that is disturbing
highly complicated world. But this is not enough, as Mr. Butler
knows, and moral and spiritual values must be restated clearly and
subject at school where a balance has to be kept between the various
that is acceptable to all. It is a lamentable fact that many of our
children today feel embarrassed and uncomfortable at the idea of
worshipping God.
the Electrical Trades Union, and it was in that Union, and it was in
that capacity that he announced the results of the elections for the
membership of the union's general executive, in which the Communists
himself a Communist, put as good a face on it as was possible in the
members. I have always said that our members are always right until
they have been proved wrong, even when they have taken unofficial
actions against an employer.
And this, certainly, is in accordance with the Communist creed,
but now the members, that is, the rank-and-file members, have cut
Union Congress. Here, however, much, if not indeed all, may depend on
the attitude of Mr. Foulkes. For while, he said yesterday, he
thought it probable that the Labour Party would agree to the
his not resigning the presidency, the TUC itself would agree.
that Mr. Foulkes should resign his office and submit himself again
to the members for re-election.
members, or at least the vast majority of members, of the ETU
want. But apart from whether or not this actually comes about, a
dictatorship &mdash; and dictatorship is the mainspring of the Communist
creed &mdash; is suffered to continue in a union it can only be put down to
apathy on the part of the ordinary members. Apathy in others is the
roost for so long in the councils of the ETU. But now there
is to be a change at the top, one which it is to be hoped will be
Barrier to peace
the light of the latest developments as reported from Oran. For
progressive recruitment of the whole of the European male population
Salan, it will be recalled, was in France sentenced to death in his
absence for treasonable acts against the State. He is determined,
whatever the native population may say or do in the matter. Salan, in
the spot, even though he may weave his plots from an underground
headquarters. And indeed he has little if any option here, for to
Paris, in which case it would undoubtedly go hard with him. There is
resources of the French Government itself. Nevertheless, the omens
Grants to students
the second reading of which was moved by Sir David Eccles in the House
Minister said, the measures proposed are not likely to satisfy
everybody in all respects, but the desirability of automatic awards
remarked Sir David, had grown over the years to a most complicated
animal.
significant increase in the number of awards students  at
universities. But once a student has been accepted for a first-degree
course, and has the necessary qualifications, then the award would be
concerned, the Bill would impose upon them the duty of making these
other conditions, with which they would be obliged to conform.
the increase in the number of university students. In future, a
student would know for certain, no matter where he lived, precisely
how he could qualify for an award, and how the amount of that award
though in a relaxed form.
But the Bill has another purpose, one concerning school-leaving
compromise between what would be the ideal method from the point of
industry on the other. For so far as the organisation of the schools
is concerned, the best, most convenient plan would undoubtedly be to
have only one leaving date in the year, but then that would obviously
pose certain special difficulties for industry. It would mean, as Sir
find it hard, and perhaps, indeed, impossible, to absorb within a
reasonable time all the young people who had thus been thrown, at one
swoop, so to speak, on to the labour market.
A FAMILY AFFAIR
conference season may at times seem indigestible to the layman.
Perhaps this is particularly true at this time of year when many
conferences have been dealing with education in its various forms.
ourselves as individuals, and a great many of the discussions are at a
that every layman (and woman) owes it to himself and his children to
take a greater interest in education, for the basis of all education
that the family influence for good is not necessarily related to a
high level in income. Miss M. G. Green, headmistress of
Kidbrooke School, London, and a member of the Crowther Committee, made
Conference in Newcastle the other day. The best parents are not those
to see that their children have advantages which they themselves
lacked. Indeed it has always been so.
Masters' Association of Great Britain, told his audience that although
flexible, most adaptable, most ineradicable institution in the history
standing up well to the strains of modern life.
lacking. True comprehensive education can be achieved only when
members occasionally exercising the veto of authority.
the competitive power of the industry in return for an immediate wage
increase is by no means one-sided. Reorganization of the yards may
have an important part to play. One of the most experienced
the West Hartlepool shipbuilding, repairing and engineering company
shipyards would achieve economies and lead to better planning. His
view was that larger units, operating more closely together, could
advanced.
consortiums &mdash; one believes that they lead inevitably to cheaper ships
heavy and out of touch with what is happening in shops and ships. The
experience on Wearside of grouping of shipyards is that efficiency
improves without the loss of the family ties which have established
the river's reputation for good ships and good relationships at yard
Exploratory talks are now about to begin into the possibility of
a closer link between William Doxford and Sons and the Sunderland
Shipbuilding Group (which includes the North Sands and Deptford
the two concerns already work together. A check of the ships launched
have been fitted with Doxford machinery. And there could be no
clearer indication of the Sunderland Shipbuilding Group's faith in the
promised when the position is clarified. Meanwhile the second
skilled platers, welcome the decision of the district committee of the
its embargo on the entry of apprentices into the yards because of
reduced steadily during the past year, the Society does not consider
riveters, burners and heaters are concerned. The shipbuilders,
however, put forward an irrefutable case for resuming apprenticeships
in the plating trade and here the Wear District Committee of the
Society has given ground, although the intake will still be strictly
limited.
among its members so that the ban can be raised as soon as possible.
The Wear Shipbuilders' Association considers that full recruiting of
apprentices should be resumed immediately if the best interests of the
industry, the union and the boys are to be served. If the level of
STRIKING APPEAL
Park last Saturday included probably a preponderance of trade
easily concede equal rights to the white-shirt workers.
East Federation of Trades Councils from the Jarrow and Hebburn branch
themselves. (Hitherto the problem has been to get the crowds in.)
In the name of working solidarity the good trade unionist is
to play, and, for good measure, to give up his chance of an overnight
even the white ball will be declared black. Whatever the rights or
more baffling test.
experiments at the Common Cold Research Unit at Salisbury are having
sneezed at. Apparently people who are quite prepared to take a 50-50
winter months, notwithstanding the promise of a free pint of beer each
day and 3s pocket money. In view of the importance of the
people far removed from Salisbury?
Wearsiders, for example, may reasonably reflect that there is not
much point in making a sacrificial journey to Wiltshire if the object
Cold Hesledon. Come to think of it, any of these places &mdash; and others
Common Cold Research Units of their own at this season. The problem
long ago by an American sufferer. A cold is both positive and
HOME AND SAFETY
may have difficulty in escaping occasional one-sided exercises in the
ungentle art of feminine raillery. Yet it seems that in certain
officials who made 1960 a special safety year for Yorkshire
deaths and serious injuries.
At the start of the year 120,000 miners each received a letter
from the divisional chairman urging them to be more safety conscious.
it &mdash; and perhaps nag their menfolk into taking extra care. Now
provisional accident figures for the year suggest that wifely
and the fact that the accident rate in this coalfield is lower than
ENTER THE UNKNOWN
UNLIKE his two predecessors in the American Presidency, Mr
world is, technically, at peace. President Truman took over during
World War 2. President Eisenhower assumed office during the Korean
War, a conflict which to the Americans ranked close in importance to
the world war itself. The surest way of winning a war is the
relatively simple one of building up physical strength, which both
strongest nation, but she no longer holds the position of world
the past decade Russia and Western Europe have recovered from the
devastation they suffered in the war. China is developing towards the
countries to regard American economic aid as part of a pattern of
centre of attraction. Other stars have joined the cast. That the
Last years at school
LORD Amory is to head the Central Advisory Council for
schools and further education institutes. It is within this age group
that outlooks are formed and decisions are taken that lead to
Lord Amory's long-standing interest in youth &mdash; particularly in
the young teenagers now to be considered &mdash; will be of great value to
in which large numbers of youngsters must find their first jobs.
no doubt feel that much more positive planning must be done soon to
prepare for a further year.
been very uneven over the country, but at least the evidence is likely
Reduced to its simplest form, the problem is whether the last
year in school (for those children who will not go on to a grammar or
senior technical school) should be used to broaden the youngsters'
minds or for elementary vocational training to equip them for jobs.
Apart from the broad arguments about desirability one way or another
need regular intakes of school-leavers in particular localities.
understanding or in practical group work taking in pre-apprenticeship
It might be that when the leaving age is raised to 16 the last
teaching. Vocational training and appreciation courses could then be
directions.
While the Advisory Council will be concerned mainly with children
fall below the average. It seems a pity that the terms of reference
should cover both and it is to be hoped that the Council's report will
treat them separately for special provisions may have to apply in the
S. Rhodesia agreement
PERHAPS one does not have to look very far for an explanation
Rhodesia. It illustrates the fact that an ounce of example is worth a
been severely shaken by the realisation of what can happen when
crashing down about them.
It is still too early to see what the effect will be upon
Northern Rhodesia, where the European community is much smaller, but
there are grounds for hope, even though the present constitutional
conference in London may achieve little.
Hitherto, it has been the Europeans in Northern Rhodesia who have
favoured federation and the Africans who have mainly opposed it (on
European community in Southern Rhodesia).
softening of the attitude of the Africans in Northern Rhodesia is
possible. This, in turn, should ease or remove some of the worst
fears of the Europeans among them.
there is once again some hope that the Central African Federation can
remain in existence instead of being torn apart either by the Southern
suspicions.
economic means to sustain political advance. Racial and political
AT first glance Sir William Holford's design for the new
is to become of Piccadilly Circus, and will shrink from the
thought.
Architectural models are liable to be misleading because they are
ever stop to contemplate the Circus from such a level &mdash; from this
angle it would be a fleeting view with swiftly-changing vistas seen
from a helicopter.
a pedestrian's view from somewhere near the foot of Eros does not
Congestion because the surface area of the Circus seems to have
been substantially reduced from what it is today. Jumble because no
made worse by the compression of traffic into narrow canyons and
Meanness because of the impression of a meagre square shut in by
The publicity with which the scheme has been launched has made
much of the gaiety of the new Circus. But gaiety is an expansive
There is something to be said for the intimacy of college
quadrangle, and the enclosed treatment adopted in the Holford design
might be attractive from an Oxford standpoint for this reason &mdash; but
When the Government intervened to stop the building of the Jack
Cotton monster on the Monico site it seemed that, after all,
the opportunities of its situation. The Holford proposal fails on
A much better solution exists in the scheme drawn up by the
London County Council's architects. It may not be perfect, but at
least it has some of the qualities of spaciousness, harmony and style
considerable advantages in going back to this design, even if it
A newspaper and its readers
number today, has been due to the support of its readers, who, we
hope, will share our pleasure in reaching a round number large enough
to warrant a minor celebration. They do us the compliment of buying
the paper, which suggests a measure of success in providing them with
to some papers, and has done the profession of journalism a good deal
stimulus of some competition from the London evening papers). This
imposes obligations. A paper in such a position should do more than
accurately and without bias. Points of view which the paper may not
on space.
This is not necessarily a recipe for maximum popularity. But
A paper must be prepared to be unpopular when necessary &mdash;
especially a local one which is sometimes exposed to pressures at
open and provocative.
So far as the official editorial opinion of the paper is
editor who once proclaimed, ~I have nailed my colours to the
been the policy of the Oxford Mail and Times Ltd., to encourage
differences of view in the evening and weekly papers which are under
When boiled down to essentials the functions of a newspaper are
remarkably simple &mdash; though not easy to achieve. They are in essence
argument about matters of controversy.
principles. It is an exciting world we live in, and Oxford shares in
most of the things our world gets up to. If the Oxford Mail succeeds
becomes clear that the United Nations representation there cannot
respects than not to be there at all. It does nothing for the Congo,
it does nothing for the authority of the UN, and it is unfair to
policy and that decision cannot be taken unless the countries of the
Security Council agree upon it. That means in practice that Russia
and the United States must find some common ground on which to
This is where the slightly improved atmosphere between Moscow and
Washington might prove to be of value. There is no reason to suppose
that the Russians will act from any other motive than self interest,
themselves recognise the need to end it.
By JOHN BAKER-WHITE
JUST how red is Africa? To what extent has the Soviet
propaganda machine succeeded in influencing the upsurge of African
economic, in the great African continent? And were the disorders in
The answers to these questions press not only on politicians,
the pattern of the world.
In probing for the answers to these questions I shall start by
them is the Kingdom of Morocco, another Tunisia, a third Libya.
It is true that a few students from these countries are
studying the techniques of revolution in Moscow and Prague, and a
the governments are anti-Communist and the people disinterested
In the Sudan the Communist Party is illegal, the political
intelligence system alert, and to date efforts by the World Federation
It may surprise some people to know that Communism, at the
Socialist intellectuals, but he has no illusions about Communist
London. When Ghana got its independence Moscow thought the new state
Communists our rivals
with the Soviet bloc &mdash; but only on his own terms.
Communism he regards not so much as an ally but as a competitor.
warned that the Soviet Union was planning to establish in this new
In Conakry, the capital, shops are full of Czech matches,
Russian textiles. Czech cement is building the new docks, German
leaders is open already.
organisations have held conferences at Conakry. One of them was the
Afro-Asian Solidarity Council, based in Cairo, and, for the past three
within the next six months the Council will move permanently to
Conakry, for Guinea &mdash; not Cairo &mdash; is now the most important Red
bridgehead in Africa.
else at the suddenness and violence of them, but it is, of course, a
situation ideal for exploitation.
training in Moscow, and the officer in charge of the Guinea contingent
of the U N forces in the Congo is a fully indoctrined Communist.
thirty-strong Soviet technical mission has arrived in
Leopoldville. It may be pure coincidence that they are all tall,
Red Army officers in plain clothes.
Communism had little or nothing to do with the riots in South
In contrast, Moscow has embarked upon a special operation in
Nations trust territory under the administration of Belgium, but a few
days ago she announced that she was giving up the trusteeship.
vice-president of the United Movement Party, Paul Kabandrouka.
Through Khokhlov he sent a message to Moscow. Let the U S S
urgently and without delay.
would suit Moscow's purpose admirably. It joins the frontiers not
trusteeship and protectorate moving towards self-government.
Secret police ruthless
Communist agitators.
While he was living in London the Communists made a number of
approaches to Dr. Hastings Banda, the Nyasaland nationalist leader,
but there is evidence that, like President Nkrumah, he has few
While Moscow continues to step up the radio barrage on the ears
of African listeners, the most significant developments in the
propaganda offensive in the coming months will come from Peking.
China radio propaganda
inter alia, to support the joint struggle of the African
output to Africa is now 550 hours a week, and includes special
broadcasts in Cantonese to overseas Chinese in South Africa,
Madagascar and Mauritius.
A recent check on a book-store on  Conakry showed that
there were 14 Chinese publications on sale, compared with three
Russian and one Czech. One of the latest Peking publications is a
training manual for African trade unionists.
Council meeting in Conakry was the largest of all, and the official
by RADAR
They have slumped as a result of the build-up of a variety of
difficulties.
administration.
This is not to say that the discontented are running to the
As is usual at by-elections, the disgruntled and disillusioned
in October, 1959, and who have not recently had the chance to vote for
a parliamentary candidate, are talking among themselves.
the accent of the reasonably well-off.
more reactionary, trying to please their Right Wing more than their
Left or centre supporters.
No single act by the Government has done more to foster this
On the other hand, everyone but the Right-wing Conservatives
applauded the Prime Minister's wind of change attitude towards
dealing with the problem of Africa and the coloured people.
In the event, the wind has dropped to no more than a gentle
any movement at all.
Harold Macmillan himself has had a difficult time. So far as
general affairs have been concerned he has deliberately attempted to
Last year he put everything he had into trying to bring about a
heartbreaking, none the less.
Verwoerd's apartheid doctrines.
that particular score.
There is still one glittering prize to be grasped. The man who
No one can blame Harold Macmillan for trying to reach the elusive
goal. And few would be so uncharitable as to say that he would like
position as leader of the British Commonwealth of Nations gives him a
better chance than most.
Once more, he believes, he must try to be the intermediary
blocs. If nothing else, the Americans have to be convinced that the
Government of Red China must be given full recognition, admitted to
the United Nations, and treated as what it is &mdash; one of the leading
governments in the world.
DURING this week in the cities of Rome, Paris, and New York,
it is safe to predict that a total of at least 70 people will be
murdered.
In New York alone a serious offence is committed every two
THAT AT LEAST HALF THE PEOPLE BEHIND THESE CRIMES WILL GO UNDETECTED.
new country, trying for the first time to exploit its resources and
catch up with the West. Everywhere there are new factories, new
post-war years of utility in Britain. Much is obviously being
cheap.
On the bright days which follow one another in summer the
which they can do for a very modest outlay.
The night clubs are full, and whether you eat in a restaurant or
a private home you soon discover the Hungarians are traditionally the
biggest eaters in Europe, and take a pride in it &mdash; to the distress of
their doctors.
few European countries where cinema attendances have steadily
limited, and with about 150,000 sets in the country has hardly yet
The Hungarians are a lively people, with a sense of humour very
much like ours. If they have their troubles and sorrows, in the
a potato queue.
I saw nothing to suggest an overall shortage of food &mdash; on the
contrary. The official explanation of the meat queues was that they
to losing customers abroad by not meeting export orders.
Comparisons of standards of living are difficult to make because
of traditional differences in the way of life and pursuit of
incomes. For instance, rents in Hungary are extremely low, running
from 15s. to &pound;2 a month.
ignored, and, indeed, it must literally be so by many in Budapest, for
the trams are usually so packed that it would be impossible to collect
the fares even if the customers were anxious to pay.
A really cheap midday meal is widely available by law, and the
in Britain, although this probably has much more to do with tradition
and a feeling that food is more important than the social revolution.
Deductions for pensions and trade union funds may amount to 4 per
cent., but income tax is not something that has to be worried about.
a month, with a range of, say &pound;14 a month for an office cleaner to
&pound;50 plus a month for a coal miner.
plus, for instance, is in the form of an annual bonus based on
loyalty, i.e., years of service and good timekeeping.
At a pit I went down, the list of bonuses paid to every miner was
pinned up. The largest amounted to two months' wages &mdash; over &pound;100 &mdash;
as here, if they can get them &mdash; furniture, television, refrigerators
Among the rewards of good work and conformity with enthusiasm
make a profit on his stay. My guide in one town told me she had
been awarded a fortnight's holiday on the Black Sea for her good work.
welfare, culture and sports. But, except through these official
channels, the possibilities for holidays away from home must be
limited because currency is not made available.
There are many things in the new Hungary it is easy to like and
appetite for education, including self-education, and for culture
and the facilities provided for satisfying it.
There is the lack of class-consciousness, at least in the towns,
smartly-dressed men and women in restaurants and night clubs.
There is self-criticism and a great desire to do better.
Dull papers
like to see some as bright as the British ones, although, of course,
their contents would be different.
They can laugh at their own weaknesses, like the belief that it
is impossible to eat in a restaurant without gipsy music, although the
things in the country were due only to socialism and the Party
the western world or refusal to believe what did not suit the theory.
journalist insisted that unemployment was our major difficulty in
fact, there were more situations vacant than people looking for jobs.
keep people well, while it pays western doctors to keep them sick.
Hardly able to believe my ears, I asked him if he really believed
that.
profit in a capitalist country?
One can be full of admiration for the things being done &mdash; the
make it impossible to accept that many of these things are also being
countries; an apparent assumption that everything from free libraries
to large-scale farming and co-operatives to health services are new
Curtain. I read not long ago in an English paper a description of
Budapest in the early evening suggesting it was a dark and depressing
others lit up. There, as in other Hungarian cities, it is possible
they would not show their identity papers, the situation has built up
occasion American soldiers had entered the Soviet sector since the
city was divided.
members of the U.S. mission should establish their identity when
In fact, the dispute has arisen out of a bold attempt by the East
If East Berlin were part of a sovereign nation, no foreign
the Berlin blockade.
What the East Germans are trying to establish was clearly shown
running commentary, told his listeners: Now the Americans are
This was, of course, untrue, the negotiation was a flat
with whom they would, no doubt, establish their identity.
What is at stake, in fact, is whether the West recognises Herr
The West has no intention of recognising Herr Ulbricht, as it has
The full story behind this dangerous confrontation shows there
Communist leaders, long believed that the Russians were too cautious
about Berlin and that, given a free hand, he could get away with a
bit-by-bit encroachment on Western rights which would result in West
He had been pressing to be allowed to build his wall and
close all but a handful of crossings for a long time before he
intelligence had learned it was coming. But it wrongly believed the
crossings would be made available through negotiations, if necessary,
determination to resist, by force if necessary, the next attempt to
take another slice from the West Berlin sausage.
by THE GOSSIPER
LOCAL booksellers are anticipating a heavy demand for
copies of the new version of the Holy Bible.
representative of one of Lincoln's leading firms of booksellers told
have today put in an order for additional supplies. Many of the
advance orders, of course, have come from clergymen, but we have had
many years before the Old Testament, and the Apocrypha are
THE man who holds the record for length of service as
Lincoln's Member of Parliament &mdash; since the city's representation was
became a member of the Palace of Westminster Home Guard when it was
formed in 1940. And we saw him, for a fleeting two or three seconds,
Walter, nearest the camera, was on parade in shirt sleeves.
Many Lincoln people recognised him. And many also noticed the
although some might argue that he ceased to be M.P. three weeks
earlier! The General Election of 1945 took place on July 5 but,
Sir Walter &mdash; he had been knighted in the dissolution honours &mdash; lost
this parliament runs its normal course.
The last General Election was in October 1959 and it is
likely that the next will be in the early part of 1964. Mr. \de
Freitas became M.P. for Lincoln in February 1950 and his term
HONEST &mdash; BUT UNREASONING
set up his Parliamentary record by beating the term of office of Mr.
1918. But the all-time record is one of 20 years, held by Colonel
Charles Sibthorp, an early Victorian Member, and one of a number of
gentlemen of that family who at one time or another represented
Lincoln in the Commons. Charles was first elected in 1826 but was
unseated in 1832. However, he was re-elected in January 1835 and
That was the Colonel Sibthorp who achieved notoriety for his
outspokenness in debate, and of whom The Times said His name
has long been a household word, as the very embodiment of honest, but
Speaker for his unparliamentary language, but he did on one occasion
W.E.A'S JUBILEE
THE golden jubilee meeting of Lincoln W.E.A. branch
The branch has survived two world wars, and battled its way
successfully through the Great Depression. Now it has gone full
second war it has met to consider The Affluent Society.
that the speaker was Mrs. Mary Stocks, well-known as a member of the
B.B.C. Brains Trust and radio programme Any Questions?
the city in the past, Lincoln is not entirely unknown to Mrs.
because at that time women could not take degrees) was also a member
to the illness of her father, one time Archdeacon of Leicester, and
later Canon of Peterborough, and settled in Kettering. During the
her affection for it.
COMMENTARY FROM City and County
her pension has revealed that this was far from being a solitary
Yarborough-crescent, indicate that this begging has been going on on
what seems to be quite a large scale. The caller from the barracks
enough, so I gave her another sixpence.
GOOD LUCK LETTERS
as I write &mdash; Dame Fortune has failed to smile on me to any unusual
extent.
The Netherlands. You are to have good luck four days after
Write it all out 20 times! It would take me nearly 97 hours to do
This letter is about as nonsensical as other chain letters
ridiculous letter 20 times. I am afraid it left my hands before the
figure 7.
A colleague who travels regularly on Lincoln Corporation buses
tells me he has been asked by someone, acting as spokesman for a third
that they were saved and then handed in at the Corporation Transport
some worthy cause benefited.
Mention of this to the Corporation Transport General Manager,
MY reference to the fire which, in February, 1922, destroyed
reader of something &mdash; and provided me with an illustration of what
long memories some people have for trivialities!
fire, in connection with something else, and having turned up the
description which had been given to the Echo at the time by a lady
she had said the planet Venus could be seen shining through the glow
Now an anonymous reader writes to tell me she couldn't have
seen Venus that night because it wasn't shining!
informs me that the sun set at about 5.34 on the day of the fire and
at about half past seven &mdash; by someone rejoicing in the name of Cocky
Any other astronomically minded reader who would like to venture what
COMMENTARY FROM City and County
WHAT is the objection to utilising the old burial ground in
It is untidy and, apart from what grass there is being trimmed
now and then, it is not particularly well looked after. Gravestones
are broken and almost wholly indecipherable. Only a few years ago,
rest &mdash; for the living, not the dead &mdash; and the gravestones were
taken up, some of them being used for the footpaths. And going
taking a slice from the old burial ground.
cars which today are partly blocking the roads by being parked at the
A LETTER from an 83-years-old lady living near Sleaford
LETTERS to the EDITOR
MICHAEL McCARTHY and Frank Platt in their open letter to
Labour Party members refer to Socialism and the new defence policy
without at any time defining Socialism, except in vague platitudes and
from the Tory Government's present policy.
For example, the Tory Party and Mr. Gaitskell insist that the
This has led to the position of Mr. Gaitskell and his
used.
defence against H-bombs, particularly for our small island, and that
therefore a defence policy for British people must be designed to
achieved if we accede continually to the demands for military bases
from the main opponents of disarmament, the Americans and the Germans.
Your correspondents suggest that the doctrinaires are in a
minority in the party, and refer to local M.P.s, who support the
suggest that Mr. Hales would be a party to any policy which is not
Mr. McCarthy and Mr. Platt also suggest that the Campaign for
Democratic Socialism came into being because moderates have lacked an
What policy differences have our Democratic Socialists with the
They say that the benefits of the affluent society should be
used to assist the less fortunate, and that stress should be given to
public as against private interests. What, precisely, have they in
mind? Increases in taxation of the rich, to increase old-age
about such class legislation? How can you guarantee that industry
Our two Democratic Socialists regard the public ownership of
industries or services as a useful technique to be justified on its
platitude. Socialists advocate public ownership as the only means of
ensuring that we haven't two classes in society, one that produces the
and the other class who own industry, but do not play any part
directly or indirectly in the production or distribution of the
Our Democratic Socialists make a clarion call to all members of
the Labour Party to make themselves heard. For what purpose? To
How can this be done when our Democratic Socialists deny the
right of members of the Party to determine policy, when they insist
that no-one has the power to dictate to the Parliamentary Labour
right to dictate policy to Labour Party members.
Clearly our two Democratic Socialists are suggesting that the
Labour Party should give up its heritage as a democratic party of the
plus a few harmless platitudes, but also Tory organisational
R. SEDDON.
closing on Tuesday afternoons was abolished and replaced by closing on
Saturday afternoons?
Managing Director,
John Baggs Electric Ltd.
O H G S PLACES
I WONDER if the Town Council are prepared to state why the
places to the Hulme Grammar Schools have been so drastically reduced.
scheme of a few places from each?
I shall be interested to see their reasons if they will give
them.
RATEPAYER.
pathetic attempt to divert your readers' attention from the main
cannot take time off from screaming emotional slogans about wealthy
Or does Mr. Platt realise already that there can be no defence
against such indiscriminate and amoral use of public money? Certainly
that the onus is now very definitely on local authorities to consider
Mr. Platt seems terribly confused in his analysis of the new
Housing Bill, though he is certainly right in the  drawing
attention to the apparent inconsistency of redistributing the
additional &pound;3 million by which the housing subsidies' bill rises
every year, i.e. to cover new building, and failing to
redistribute the existing &pound;61 million.
One suspects that the Government was wary of the immense
local authorities, after all, have already taken into account when
arriving at a rent for existing property, i.e. &pound;22 1s. for
slum clearance, &pound;10 for one-bedroomed houses suitable for old people,
instead of a grant for specific purposes as previously, and this
context, his assertion that this &pound;3 million is entirely taken up by
larger towns with a relatively high number of pre-war houses compared
financial needs test proposed in the Bill (i.e., where rent
the particular local authority's houses exceeds annual expenditure and
possible rent resources to balance their housing revenue accounts.
for the benefit of their more needy tenants, financed by a
rate-subsidy which would be smaller than hitherto.
rise at a precipitous rate, and local authorities suddenly finding
that their rent income falls short of housing expenditure to the
Platt significantly fails to suggest any alternative to the 1956 gross
Councillor KEITH W. TAYLOR.
someone should put a stop to all this idle gossip about the pupils.
for the rest, and in this case all the pupils are getting blamed for
things unruly children have done.
of the parents, too. Teachers have heard so much gossip about
I cannot blame the fourth-formers for wanting to spend the last
by this protest because they cannot help it if teachers will not stay
blamed.
All this gossip is due to one or two disobedient children which
EX-PREFECT.
WHY STAY?
WHEN Elector and Southerner have finished pulling
us to pieces, I would like to ask them what's keeping them here. If
Who do they think they are kidding?
DOROTHY MOSS.
I FEEL I must answer Southerner's statement that
more than 30 years.
Subways Preferred to Baths
nearly 5,000 people drowned in and around Britain in 1960. I know
nothing of the accuracy of these figures, although Saturday's
Echo mentions a figure of 4,000 every year.
had they been non-swimmers.
It is so often the swimmer that ventures out, gets into
and very rarely I think enter rivers.
would make the slightest difference to the numbers that flock to our
the desire or inclination to do so. Then again so many people much
prefer the sea or river to the baths.
Having learned to swim in the sea, I am one of the latter, much
preferring the fresh sea breeze to the heavy chlorinated odour of the
municipal swimming bath.
If the Council wish to spend our money and gain the thanks of
everyone, by benefiting everyone as they should, then let them set
One in the Prom. would be sufficient to solve that immediate
problem, and I would suggest two for the High-street.
Pittville Park &mdash; how much more useful it would be under the
High-street! But no doubt it has saved some child's life being where
D. C. WRIDE.
Prestbury-road,
Spurs and the Double
Sir, &mdash; With only a few weeks of the present soccer season left
chief interest in sporting circles is, can Tottenham Hotspurs,
North End?
almost unassailable position; in fact it will be the surprise of the
Roker Park where next Saturday Tottenham and Sunderland will fight it
out in the semi-final. 'Spurs have an extremely tough task here.
In conclusion, it is interesting to note that Sheffield Utd.
and Sunderland, both Second Division, also have possible Double
chances.
BERT WILLIAMS,
Chain Letter Hoax
Sir, &mdash; It has been brought to my attention yet again that there
have the support of the National Savings Movement and a well-known
national bank.
I would like to inform your readers, through your columns, that
these chain letters are illegal and are, in fact, a complete hoax.
or the national bank which is purported to be trustee for the funds.
destroy the letter when it is received.
J. C. NICHOLLS,
Hon. Secretary,
Tribute to the Late J. W. O. Pope
town, I think our Press has paid a great and moving tribute to this
tireless citizen.
All I can say is that Norwich lost a great man of Socialist
Maxton; and now Cheltenham has lost a good man with these same
F. G. SHORT
(late Secretary I.L. Party),
Cheltenham.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
columns. After reading Free Trader's latest example, I could
refrain no longer.
If one follows his argument that only swimmers should pay for a
What the swimmers are asking for is not a free service, as they
enjoying themselves and for teaching their children to swim (as,
despite Free Trader's statement that only swimmers and
entertainment or amusement, surely he cannot begrudge them to people
that old people should save enough to retire on without needing
pensions, and Mrs. O'Gorman decides it would be better to do away
SPOON-FED.
Sir, &mdash; The statement that 5,000 deaths (since amended to 4,000)
argument for a new super swimming bath when it is estimated that more
than half of these people could already swim.
No one wanting to learn to swim in Cheltenham is prevented. I
Other towns seem to manage to build baths reasonably, e.g.
Worcester &pound;30,000, Norwich &pound;130,000. Why does Cheltenham need
excessively high rates than by the fact that there was a luxury
Alderman Lipson observed that the Council is apt to recommend new
assertion that it is not practicable to cover and heat the Sandford
hounds when it does not fear the kill. The answer lies in
all five continents, while beagling becomes increasingly popular,
especially in the U.S.A.
Mondays for Shop Workers
Saturday afternoon or all day Wednesday closing has been
Saturdays for industrial workers and civil servants. Why not
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
Sir, &mdash; Landworkers' wages and conditions should be better,
is &pound;8 9s. a week, with no overtime allowed. This does not leave
much to live on after insurance, tax, rent and so on have been paid.
There are no canteen facilities, no free or helped-by-cash transport,
and the landworker is out in all winds and weathers.
for factory workers and other trades have greatly improved, so why not
workers more in the region of &pound;10 10s., bringing them more in line
if the landworker's wage was &pound;10 10s. a week they would return to
deserve it.
LANDWORKER'S WIFE.
Montpellier Caryatides
Sir, &mdash; I have lived practically all my life in Cheltenham, but
same mould!
nature of this discrepancy?
who hoped to make an easy shilling by offering to bet on it; he was
Devotion to Patients
discharge.
In the painstaking care, attention, and devotion to their
patients, the sisters and nurses were truly wonderful, and did much to
During visits to my wife, I was able to note the human and
personal relationship between nurses and patient; and this, developing
It is a pity these kindly people, with their quiet, unassuming
operations, and the sisters and nurses retain their refreshing charm
C. N. BROOKS,
76 MILTON-ROAD,
Policy of Masterly Inactivity
the Development Plan, unless they can come up with some scheme to
of masterly inactivity. In other words, they should carry on as they
have been doing for the last 10 years until some bright spark among
ratepayers' hard-earned money.
J. A. WHITAKER.
Alveston House,
N.H. Festival Record Likely
Sir, &mdash; As the National Hunt Festival meeting approaches, it is
change in the unusual mild weather.
It is hoped that any late sudden snap will stay away sufficiently
long enough for the three-day popular Festival.
set up for attendances.
Commentary
Insoluble housing problem
parties vied with each other in their claims as to how many houses
The task was solely to see how speedily it could be met with the
but attention is often focussed more on the young home-seekers, the
newly-married couples wishing to set up a home, but faced with
need for adequate housing for established families.
Chislehurst-Sidcup Council have a housing list of more than 1,300.
With the exception of the North Cray Place Estate, they have built
all the major estates they can. There is little land left in the
urban district, with its Green Belt setting, for either Council or
should be. What we do know is that the newcomers on the list outstrip
what is happening at the present time. We also know that even in this
pleasant district, some families are still living in overcrowded
The view has been expressed in Council that the housing problem
will be with us for many years to come. The word always has been
used. If that is to be the case, then we need some shrewd thinking on
what to do about it. What hope is there for the 1,300 and the
hundreds more who will no doubt go to the Council offices in the years
are a few slums in Chislehurst-Sidcup &mdash; and at the same time they are
reminded to provide dwellings specially suitable for the elderly. How
for people to own their own houses. By this means the Council should
number of tenants.
Is our education worth the price?
relaxation after a long period of intense activity, which, for many
farewell to schools that have guided and encouraged them, and next
competitive technical and scientific world.
in the years before and after the 11-plus &mdash; that mystic phrase that
head master said recently, there is no such thing as failing the
education for each child, and from what we have seen it certainly
seen how modern trends in education are helping to prepare the
children for the years ahead. They have been impressed by light, airy
provided, and it is up to the children to make the best use of them.
given every assistance to pursue their studies, not only by the
bill accounts for the majority of county spending. It has risen over
and it is therefore right that he should ask, Is it worth it?
chance of playing their part.
Consider all aspects of the question before giving a verdict. That
Commentary
Thefts from cars
protection and to seek information as to how best their trader members
could protect their property.
vigilance and alertness in past months. But there is one form of
according to police reports. In most cases the thefts occur in the
hunting grounds for the prowling car thief at night.
The high incidence of these thefts has caused the Sidcup police
to issue yet another warning to the public this week. It is simply to
are left, with no property of value left visibly enticing on the back
seat. A locked door is at least a deterrent &mdash; a thief will move on to
Bank holiday tragedy
IN the last year or so road safety officials have acclaimed
the urban district boundaries, but the victim was a Chislehurst boy,
inquest. It took place on a part of the A20 that has a dual
carriageway &mdash; which the people of Sidcup are still hoping will be
extended into this urban district &mdash; so the need for a road improvement
What is alarming is not only that this sort of accident can still
happen with dual carriageways, but that there could so easily have
been other fatal accidents within the urban district over the
week-end. A number of brushes between traffic was reported to the
police, several of them causing minor injury.
unless there is marked improvement in driving standards on our
over-congested roads other drivers may find themselves less lucky in
price being paid by the ratepayers of Chislehurst-Sidcup for the acts
of vandalism committed by small gangs of hooligans. It is lamentable
that we should so soon have to record our disgust and dismay at the
amount of damage still being caused to public and private property,
Chislehurst-Sidcup and Orpington Divisional Education Committee more
than &pound;400. We record this week that a cricket pitch at Penhill was
been the victims of vandals and considerable damage has been caused to
buildings, equipment and crops.
Those responsible obviously have too much time on their hands,
is nothing to do. There are many outlets for those who wish to
lead constructive lives &mdash; and the majority do. Many young people
hobbies; and many engage in pursuits that will bring them benefits in
the future.
is always room for more and improved facilities for young people to
true, but we must deal with the situation as it exists to-day.
There is the problem of this minority of young people who seem
unable to fit themselves into the modern scheme of things. We must
help them, but we must also take a firm line. Their actions may be
the result of frustration, but there can be no more frustrated people
than those who have suffered at their hands. Hooliganism in any shape
or form must be stamped out, and the public can help by reporting
anything suspicious to the police.
Commentary
Forty years of achievement
rest of the country.
Financed by the money collected on Poppy Day, the Legion's only
general appeal to the public, it has given immediate and long term aid
to hundreds of thousands of ex-Service men and women, their families
and dependents. It maintains four convalescent and four country
homes, the latter giving permanent homes to 230 elderly or permanently
industries and, through the Disabled Men's Industries, to home-bound
disabled. It also provides work and homes for tubercular ex-Service
men at Preston Hall, near Maidstone, where the Legion pioneered the
The Legion has contributed largely to the solution of an urgent
post World War 2 problem with its house purchase scheme. In 13
Through the 5,000 services committees throughout the country
temporary and immediate relief is given; aid in sickness and in
finding jobs; old and lonely people visited and holidays arranged for
severely disabled.
The deep split in the Conservative Party over Africa gives me no
joy. Much too much is at stake for that.
Make no mistake about it, the divisions are very serious and
the revolt against the Government is grave. Lord Salisbury is a power
in the Conservative Party and he has used intemperate language &mdash; much
more vigorous than at the time of his resignation over Munich.
Ninety Conservatives, despite all sorts of pressure, have kept
their names to a motion on the Order Paper in the House of Commons
with such bitterness, unless this was a split that worries the
below the belt is going very far.
DO NOT YIELD
influential rebels.
policy nor with the way they have handled things. The Prime Minister
But it is essential that the Government should stand firm. If
they yield an inch, Britain may well have an Algeria on its hands.
GAG
the Health Service charges.
A Government must of course in proper circumstances use the means
The Government has used the guillotine out of fear. It did not
health charges.
ITEMS of news from the motor industry give the impression
This kind of news will be welcome not only in the car-building
towns here in the Midlands but also in the places where so many of the
component parts are manufactured.
The Minister of Labour is reported to be taking a new initiative
to improve industrial relations, for example, by bringing together
It is to be hoped that both management and workers will be able
to put forward constructive ideas which will help to push further into
the background the dreaded threat of unemployment.
HOUSING PROGRESS
as industry, particularly one about housing. By the end of this year
one person in every four will be living in a post-war house.
Also, nearly a million people have been re-housed from slums
since the Government's drive started in 1956. Housing for old people
is being increased and now accounts for nearly a third of all local
government building.
time training college places are being doubled to get the extra
teachers needed to do away with the evil of oversize classes.
twice as many university students as in 1938, and it is anticipated
that by 1970 the number will have more than trebled.
Another angle of education, not always so well known, is that
Kingdom, many of them from Commonwealth countries recently granted
Charles Dickens
So wrote Mr. Julius Nyerere, the Chief Minister of
Tanganyika, in last Sunday's Observer, and he echoes a basic Liberal
belief. Like Mr. Nyerere, Liberals want a non-racial Commonwealth
and a non-racial Britain.
By the time you read this, we will know whether South Africa is
or is not to remain in the Commonwealth. Liberals support those
Further, Dr. Verwoerd will be regarded in South Africa as
prevent.
IMMIGRATION
the plantations of the West Indies. Now, the descendants of those
slaves have multiplied, and those tiny islands are bursting at the
Jamaica has 20 per cent. unemployment, and it is not surprising
people is our responsibility.
so-called immigration problem &mdash; to a large extent simply a
public places.
(2.) The Government should attempt to persuade Canada and
Australia to open their doors to West Indian immigrants &mdash; and thus
relieve the pressure on living space in Britain and in the West
(3.) There should be a medical check on all immigrants; criminals
should not be admitted; and all immigrants should obtain a reasonable
place to live in before landing. The help of voluntary associations,
such as the British-Caribbean Association, should be enlisted to find
accommodation for immigrants.
(4.) Could not Smethwick Council follow the example of Willesden
by establishing an International Friendship Council to fight
racialism? &mdash;
LEFT, RIGHT &amp; CENTRE
of withdrawing the Whip from five of its members.
Parliamentary Labour Party: they do not come to its meetings, nor are
they informed of its decisions.
of the members concerned can be officially informed.
and they can always abstain from voting.
Party meeting.
Without this rule, there would be no discipline at all; the
independent MPs. Withdrawal of the Whip makes them this in form
as well as in fact.
AGAINST ESTIMATES
The five cannot justly claim that they were voting in accord
with conference decisions. This was done by the whole party when it
voted solidly against the Defence white paper.
public misunderstanding.
against was the whole Army and the whole Air Force. No conference
is not the withdrawal of the Whip that causes new disunity: but the
deliberate defiance by five members of decisions by the party.
Patrick Gordon Walker
AMONG those who like talking politics, and who have been
mainly concerned with African problems these last few weeks, interest
will soon be turning to local issues as the time draws near for the
Interest should also be increased this year as the ordinary
aldermen.
the subject of local government: We put first and foremost the idea
each side does its proper part.
authority.
growing responsibilities, the Government introduced the general grant,
This improvement in the way of dealing with financial grants has
Consequently, the councils have more responsibility and should
have a greater incentive to spend wisely the money they receive from
the local people in the form of rates, and from the taxpayers in the
form of Government grants.
The general grant takes account of the cost of local services and
will be &pound;25 million higher in 1961-62 than this year in England and
Charles Dickens
LIBERALS made another spectacular advance in last week's
In all four contests the Liberal vote rose, while both Tory and
Socialist votes slumped badly. If we compare the figures in these
by-elections with those of the last three-cornered fights, we find
nine per cent. at Cambridgeshire, 10 per cent. at High Peak, and
over 20 per cent. at Worcester.
The Liberal achievement is all the more remarkable when one
remembers the disadvantages under which the Liberal candidates worked.
the Tory and Labour parties, draw on subsidies from big business or
the big trade unions.
Moreover, these Liberal candidates had no mass circulation
newspapers to support them. In the by-election period the mass
circulation papers enforced a censorship on all Liberal views and
London, only The Guardian reported the meeting.
win new readers. The Daily Herald announced itself to be fair and
free and even The Daily Express printed an article by Jo Grimond.
Those days are now over. The Tory papers have returned to their
usual practice of reporting only Tory views, and the Labour papers
papers like the Telephone to preserve the freedom of the Press.
LETTERS TO THE EDITOR
SIR, &mdash; Could not Nuclear Disarmers consult with the police to
ambulances, etc. &mdash; BOTHWAYS.
CAR RALLIES
courteous and considerate local drivers. Indeed, ever-increasing
noise is one of the problems of our time and it seems to me that quite
in car rallies during the night. There was one through Fishpond
during the early hours of Sunday, 10th September, with a check point a
over the hill opposite (Coney Castle) in low gear. The noise was
shattering and I could even smell the exhaust fumes. This went on for
more than two hours, but those who manned the check point arrived with
night's rest destroyed. It all seems so unnecessary. Rally promoters
Fishpond, Charmouth.
PADDLE STEAMERS
railway engine, and so on, in order that the solid achievements of the
Preservation Society was formed to preserve in running order an
Hotel, the Lansdowne, Bournemouth, at 6 p.m., on 30th September,
to form a Wessex branch and all supporters of paddle steamers will be
since its formation, the Central Committee feel that a local branch
would serve more closely the interests of the members. &mdash; J. D.
BONSALL, Provisional Secretary, Wessex Branch, P.S.P.S.,
Loughrigg, 31, Cowper Road, Moordown, Bournemouth.
SQUIRRELS
Resident of Mere was moaning because a squirrel had dared to eat
squirrels pests. I wonder. I suppose Man, with his H-bombs, isn't.
for squirrels to be handed instead to a fund for distressed farmers?
Did the Wiltshire resident from Mere expect the squirrel to go off
nuts, its natural food, and try eggs and bacon instead? Again I
squirrels' sins are real and how many are purely imaginary.
Apparently nobody knows the answer. Don't be in a hurry to point out
damaged trees in Grovely woods and scream Look! Grey squirrels did
GLYN, Heneford Cottage, Chetnole, Sherborne, Dorset.
SIR, &mdash; I have read with much interest Mrs. Moule's letter
seen squirrels in the woods across the railway, but they have always
was not at all disconcerted. He jumped up, perched on the lip of the
basket, and we regarded one another on more or less equal terms for
some time at a distance of about two feet. On occasions, however,
when I had my camera with me he must have been investigating Mrs.
HOW TO MAKE FRIENDS
SIR, &mdash; As a recently-retired member of H.M. Overseas
Civil Service, my wife and I have recently settled in Dorset. I feel
that our experience may be helpful to the many people who are
Adult Education for Dorset. We found to our great pleasure that the
As these interesting and instructive lecture courses are about to
start all over the country in the next two weeks, I would urge those
loneliness which follows on a move to a new area. &mdash; P. H.
Dorset.
TEACHERS' SALARIES
SIR, &mdash; There seems to be some commotion &mdash; ballyhoo is the
modern word &mdash; about Teachers and their pay. It is not desired
Christian religion is a cross which means the letter I with a line
than I was as a parish priest. Only in my last year was it possible
To talk of a clerical Trades Union as was recently done by a more
particular. Let them not be afraid to endure hardness, if such
exists, and show a good example. Education as a profession, like
were shockingly underpaid. But it cannot fairly be said that this is
doing their work. In the course of more than 50 years' experience I
could give not a few signal instances of the same. &mdash; W. H.
SIR, &mdash; I note with annoyance the sentence in a letter in your
last issue, Increasingly, arts graduates are being taken on as
teachers without having any training. Most people realize that a
graduate has, ipso facto, had the best training that a
teacher can have. Graduates who intend to get on in the State system
graduates I know who have taken it, there is little doubt that for
teaching purposes this type of additional training is a complete
waste of time. If a prospective teacher wants to know something about
him. He can read a couple of books on each in the three months he has
between going down from university in June and taking up his first
post in September. But it seems fatuous that a teacher who is keen to
matters. The assumption that teaching is a job which requires
combated at every turn. The key to good teaching lies in knowledge of
training does nothing to develop. Most, if not all, the one-year
courses &mdash; it is the only useful thing about them &mdash; provide an
spend the whole year articled to good teachers in the schools? &mdash;
R. G. PENMAN, Silversmiths, Sherborne.
CIVIL DEFENCE
you speak of the actions of the Nuclear Disarmers as an
intensity; (3) Radiation sickness is a most unpleasant way of dying;
(4) The long-term effects of radiation are extensive and unavoidable;
natural background radiation, if no further bombs are exploded. May I
commend to your readers a short article on the effects of the
100-megaton bomb, which appears in the current New Scientist.
after all, the worst might never happen. But in my view we should be
better employed in embarrassing the Government in this matter. Given
four minutes' warning from Fylingdales, which of your readers would be
prepared to press the button which would send 100 million innocent
people to their deaths? What is our trouble? Either we have lost all
Brendon, Common Mead Lane, Gillingham, Dorset.
IT'S YOUR MONEY
SIR, &mdash; To reply point by point to Mrs. Dungworth's letter
helpful. Some newspapers print quite lengthy reports of proceedings
in Parliament and documents issued by the Stationery Office give
further details. So far as local councils are concerned a ratepayer
can inspect a record of the proceedings on demand. Many people prefer
told. Professor Parkinson and others ignore one rather important
on capital projects (roads, hospitals, houses, sewers, etc.) had to
While never minimising the immensity of her work, it lifted the
saintly halo which usually surrounds her name to reveal a warm,
dedicated person who accomplished most by perseverance and hard work.
her lifelong campaign to improve nursing in this country. The
Duncalf compressed a long and sometimes rambling story into a
concentrated comprehensive survey of a life work.
GLYNDEBOURNE CONTEMPORARY
From MARTIN COOPER
GLYNDEBOURNE, Thursday.
first unambiguously contemporary work to be admitted to the
Glyndebourne canon.
By no means a masterpiece, it is in many respects a
representative modern work and the composer is a highly skilled
manipulator of contemporary idioms, with a strong sense of words and
situation.
The libretto, by W. H. Auden and Chester Kallman, is largely
a satire on the petty court surrounding an ageing poet, whose deeply
inspiration.
Henze obtains his musical characterisation by means of individual
instrumental timbres and personal intervals, and the result is
often less delineation of character than caricature. This is also the
chief, or at least the most successfully executed trait of the
schoolboy humour.
MELODY LACKING
The composer has a happy gift for musical dialogue as well as
for the grotesque, but he is less successful in extended arioso
but an exception was the Poet's moment of self-revelation in Act 2,
which was excellently sung by Carlos Alexander.
contrasted well with the character-singing demanded of most of the
madwoman had considerable musical pathos, and Kerstin Meyer struck
Henze's chamber music style rather too enthusiastically at first, so
that the singer's words were largely obscured, and the composer's very
court, and his lighting of the later scenes suggested the ultimate
isolation in which the Poet finds himself.
CHELTENHAM, Thursday.
IT was not long ago that Richard Rodney Bennett composed a
Calendar for chamber ensemble. Now he has written a Journal
imaginative.
He does not in this Journal write one note too many. One
wonders, rather, whether he has not written too few. Or, to state
one's doubt more plainly, one wonders whether the invention in this
SLENDER IDEAS
Brief ideas are welcome indeed if they compress a sizeable
thought. It struck me that Mr. Bennett's ideas in this piece were
Perhaps it was for this reason that the work seemed somewhat pale
The cruel acoustics of the hall played havoc with textures which
many broken eggs into one basket. But one is not entirely convinced
that a relaxation of tension might not have secured a more balanced
ANGLO-CHINESE PICARESQUE
By ROLLA ROUSE
Fantasy. Translated from the Chinese by Henry McAleavy. (Allen &amp;
Unwin. 21s.)
single-sheet mosquito-newspapers, full of an assortment of
anecdotes, topical items, and serial stories, started in about 1870
by Wang T'ao, assistant to the famous sinologue Dr. Legge.
nothing of a Chinese flavour remains. What the various characters say
guest from the Foreign Office in the lowest seat at dinner, accusing
kiss in public, and least of all would a Chinese monk meeting an
all the characters have one thing in common, their coarse behaviour
and abnormal appetites. While there is a story meandering through the
book, the main object of many chapters is to record some improbable
and unpleasant anecdote.
\Amahs into Ladies
to reside, not in unfashionable Kowloon, but in snobbish Hongkong,
The main incidents occur on a country estate near London, owned
by the Chinese Legation and used by the staff, Chinese and foreign, to
BYRON'S VEXED REPUTE
The Late Lord Byron. By Doris Langley Moore. (Murray. 2gns.)
NEVER has a greater coil been made about any man than about
Byron. He sowed passions, jealousies, loyalties, scandals,
animosities and treacheries as effortlessly as some far worthier
and Byron a magnificent documenter of his own life, he has reached the
stage (I cannot remember any other great literary figure doing so)
when a monumental work can be written on the dramas that seethed and
simmered after his death, taking off from the point at which the
reader is accustomed to close a poet's biography.
Is it really worth while &mdash; one is bound to ask the question
ever lived.
been close to him. In turning over the bones Doris Langley Moore has
No previous Byron biographer, I fancy (and they have been many)
to continue her work on them for more than a year after Lady
from the shock of her brief marriage with the poet, and dedicated the
rest of her life (she was 23 when they parted) to self-justification
Would that Byron's Memoirs had also survived! How the ghost of
the first John Murray must moan in his Albemarle Street vaults to
friend, John Cam Hobhouse, he burned them there in the fireplace,
with his half-sister, Augusta Leigh, the question of the paternity of
Medora Leigh her daughter, the long inquisitorial persecution of
ghoulish novelist could wish), the patient ferreting for evidence to
unspeakable treacheries of Lady Caroline Lamb, the scarcely less
heinous treacheries of Augusta &mdash; it is the Lovelace Papers, surely,
Equally important have been the Hobhouse Journals, a vast mass of
Hobhouse family in Somerset. Hobhouse, later Lord Broughton, was
their Cambridge days, who had travelled widely with him, been
fascinated by him to a point that looks like love, had fanned the
enthusiasm which had sent Byron finally to Greece, and suffered years
of loyal exasperation as Byron's executor.
Sturdy Friends
male friends. He brought out the worst in women, as they certainly
Teresa Guiccioli, last and most reasonable love, who does not affect
The Countess Guiccioli was by birth a Gamba; her brother Pietro
accompanied Byron to Greece, shared the misery and ruinous
frustrations of the campaign, and was with him when he died. The
Gamba Papers in Ravenna have shed some valuable light on this last
blackguard, Edward Trelawney, who played a highly discreditable part
Few people come out of this detailed post-mortem with much
credit. Hobhouse certainly, though one respects him more than one
likes him, Byron himself, who, whenever his voice is heard above the
startlingly modern voice. Lady Byron most dislikeable, Augusta a
gracious living) was notably rich both in goddesses and bitches.
AFTER ten days of intermittent, near fatal ennui, the
to life by two extraordinary films, Bernhard Wicki's Das Wunder
The number of German film directors who have made first rate
Frank Wysbar (Fa"hrmann Maria), Helmut Ka"utner (Die
Grosse Freiheit No. 7), Herbert Selpin (Titanic), Wolfgang
Staudte (Rotation), and Georg Klaren (Wozzeck). It would
now seem that Wicki's name must be added to this list, for his new
Wicki is not only a director. He began his career as an actor,
had his first important film r&ocirc;le in Ka"utner's Die letzt
Bru"cke, and he also appears in the new Antonioni film. In 1950
he began to take photographs not only in Germany but also in Africa
Berlin gallery is most impressive. As Friedrich Du"rrenmatt, the
the technical means of abstraction. Every unnecessary detail, all
accuracy of a police photograph, but rather he wants to show the
The chilling horror of Malachias is due as much to Wicki the
photographer as to Wicki the director. His earlier film, Die
considerable fidelity, the film tells the story of a little monk who
prays that a disreputable night club near his church be removed. One
suddenly transplanted to an island in the North Sea.
But Father Malachias's troubles have only begun. Instead of
having the desired effect, the miracle becomes exploited by a group of
shrewd newspapermen. Soon a carnival springs up on the sight of the
and as a crowning indignity the night club is given a gala society
reopening on the island. Father Malachias goes to the island, prays,
and in a second miracle the night club is replaced in its original
building up to a tremendous climax in the island orgy. Here, the
guests arrive in ghost-like yachts, the wildly flapping white sails
does occur, it is accepted as a marvellous joke; no one has learned
anything. Wicki suddenly returns to the city for a final epilogue.
apocalypse of the last days of a sick society. It is most unfair to
call Malachias a cut-rate Dolce Vita, for it is far more
intimate and deeply felt. In 1944 Herbert Selpin tried a similar feat
in Titanic by paralleling the last days of the Third Reich with
his life. To judge from the press, Wicki is to pay by being
room only a few hours before its showing and could not be considered
in finished state. One can only hope that British audiences will have
a chance to judge this powerful creation for themselves in the near
German premi&egrave;re.
La Notte will be shortly shown in London and for that
could never follow L'Avventura with another masterpiece can
rest easy; he has done the near impossible and turned out what
that the screen has ever seen. Less obviously complex than his last
same, now even clearer, but touched with a melancholy compassion which
Strangely enough, the Berlin audience received the film with
extreme coolness, much preferring Jean-Luc Godard's disappointing
Une Femme est une Femme, a ninety-one minute hymn to
Vogue, Cahiers du Cinema, and the worst aspects of the
American cinema. From a brilliantly funny start, the work fizzles out
French entry, Michel Drach's Am&eacute;lie, ou de Temps d'Aimer,
As a refuge from the welter of mediocre features, the
retrospective shows are always of great interest, particularly the
at last being re-evaluated and given his proper place in the history
of the German film. Most charming was his tongue-in-cheek
Unheimliche Geschichten (1920), five ghost stories with a
light touch, and there was much to admire in Dreyfus (1930) and
the virtually unknown but extremely important 1914 (1931), which
World War.
Prizes being what they are, Berlin is unusually generous in
direction. Both the Antonioni and Wicki films took high honours, and
come.
by Isabel Quigly
Academy advertises Jean-Luc Godard's A bout de Souffl&eacute;
awaited new film of the nouvelle vague, and although new
is hardly accurate (the film is two years old and one of those that
gave the new wave its original impetus and excitement), certainly the
manifesto is one that anyone with an interest in what the cinema is
discussed before their public showing; and, as it turns out, few can
attitudes and techniques that have since been imitated, exaggerated,
It is disappointing though perhaps inevitable that the young
directors of the new wave made their best films at the beginning, and
either repeated themselves or deteriorated or (generally) both; for
their great limitation is the lack, once they have made their original
though at first it may look excitingly emancipated, is in fact as
Paris, its inhabitants young people &mdash; students, spivs, petty crooks,
Souffl&eacute; too late, of course, to feel its original impact, or
must have seemed excitingly new, even revolutionary, one of the films
that, sick of the old guard's deadness, stageyness, and sheer lack of
way of looking at the world. But there is a gloomy truth in the old
saws about revolutionaries turning into conservatives overnight: it is
very revolutionary qualities are copied, and appear quite dismally
affected, and by now, in the case of the new wave, the movement is so
barnacled with its own clich&eacute;s that it is hard to remember the
high &mdash; inordinately high &mdash; hopes it began with.
cousins, Les bonnes femmes &mdash; was technical supervisor) is
extremely exciting, especially if you can forget what has come since.
It has now the familiar ingredients &mdash; a nihilistic attitude to
everything, wry, built-in jokes, a murderer-thief hero &mdash; but it has,
technical fun about it, of enormous cinematic enjoyment, and above all
of cinematic sense. Much of it has that air of improvisation, as of
off-the-cuff living, that once seemed so new and so attractive. The
the sense of situation and movement it matters a lot) is that of a man
American girl (Jean Seberg) who is bearing his child (though paternity
is always a rather dubious business among the new wave): an affair
that remains spiritually unconsummated as they move on to the final
performances from him and from Jeanne Moreau, this has been fairly
even slow, rhythmically repetitive, the mysteriously simple story
subtle, literary, made by a man who is not necessarily a film-maker,
without the exclusively, ferociously cinematic eye of, say, Godard or
And for those who complain that Hollywood has grown too
family saga and regional-folksy film from giant downwards. With a
Film Virtues in A Taste of Honey
Mr. Richardson's Skilful Direction
part-author with Miss Delaney of the script, and the great advantages
apparent.
background, which bring the film so vividly to life.
In Fanny, which also has its premiere tomorrow, the director,
Mr. Joshua Logan, attempted but failed to create the atmosphere of a
monuments and the rubbish strewn canals &mdash; even the worn head-stones in
the churchyard, sacred to the memory of &mdash; are seen as an integral
Against this industrial setting Mr. Richardson has told Miss
Delaney's story. Its faults are still apparent. The plot is still
shapeless and inconclusive &mdash; indeed it is little more than an anecdote
of city life, with a beginning but no end &mdash; and the characters often
intense realism in the situation.
promiscuous mother. In such surroundings she learns sex is something
bear his child and sails away. In Fanny the pregnant girl is
befriended by an old man. Here it is a young homosexual, estranged
from women but yet moved by a strong maternal instinct to the unborn
comforter to her in her hour of need. He shares her room and gives
her his forlorn gift of companionship and sympathy &mdash; you need
someone to love you while you are looking for someone to love.
Mr. Murray Melvin is the homosexual, his long lugubrious face
reflecting a hidden and unexpressed compassion.
assessing a moving and eloquent performance by a young and immature
left his stamp so clearly on the rest of this film that some credit
It is Mr. Richardson's great gift that he can show a face in
spoken. This he does repeatedly in this film, especially with Miss
Tushingham.
last night's Prom was entirely devoted to twentieth-century music,
programme.
only of players of virtuoso technique; they are alike, too, in placing
more searching in his beautiful central chaconne. The soloist, Miss
delve more deeply into the notes than they warrant.
appeal on home ground where the Kalevala is as real as the Bible.
graphic clarity, and almost the same was true of Vaughan Williams's
exception was the finale of the symphony, which was played just a
shade too fast and not quite insubstantially enough to convey the
after the extinction of all human life.
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
LIVERPOOL, SEPT. 12.
In her latest play, launched here last night, Miss Dodie Smith,
accepting the challenge of the times, has made room for a kitchen
author's brood of brain children. Or should one call them heart
and sweet to family form.
her guests, whatever their age, lend a hand with the washing up (which
is frequent) with almost as much enjoyment as if at last some
miraculous detergent were being advertised in the live theatre.
animosities. Who but Miss Dodie Smith would have thought boarding
This boarding house has a pronounced list to stageward. It
accommodates young members of the profession and also a middle-aged
actor manqu&eacute; who has been out of touch with the world for 20 years
and is at first suspected of having been serving a prison sentence.
de-hammed for the modern stage by a young actress who is his
him delivering the most purple and familiar patches of Shakespeare.
their house because they have had a good offer for it, and a
was the absentminded theft of a library book for which in her youth
the otherwise innocent Miss Edie got 14 days without the option. The
inclusion of a titled char on the establishment is perhaps the
most deliberately modern touch.
and Mr. Willard Stoker effectively coordinates a good cast.
Rare Acting in Betti Play
OXFORD, Sept. 12
splendidly efficient play, constructed with sure instinct for
theatrical effect which never seemed to let this dramatist down.
simple sergeant of the Carabinieri arrives in a strange village at
night to investigate some irregularities concerning the town clerk.
for the night and becomes disturbingly involved with the clerk, his
host, and learns of the bitter enmity in which the mayor and the rest
hold him. Where does the truth lie? How far can the sergeant, caught
between his feelings for Irene and her family on the one hand and the
evidence and the veiled blackmail of the mayor on the other reach a
Especially when he learns that the girl, whom he believed pure
retains a strange innocence, somewhere between that of the idiot and
that of the saint, which sets up violent and contradictory emotions in
those who visit her as well as in the sergeant: they want her to go
and yet they want her to stay; he does not know until almost too late
whether he loves her or loathes her.
Arguably, the dramatist has committed a technical error in
seen but not heard. However, Miss Pinkie Johnstone makes her few
intelligence and restrained power. Mr. Bryan Stonehouse's
production is quietly effective, giving full value to the formal
elements of Betti's writing without over-emphasizing them.
morality on the not unfamiliar theme of the destructive power of
unbridled ambition. It went, perhaps, some distance beyond most
everyone, especially his wife, with whom he deals: his wife leaves him
standing in front of television cameras and, with his nerves on edge,
Aubrey Richards, the father-in-law, always comically grotesque; they
were not asked to modulate from their set moods but played with proper
efficiency and, in the case of Mr. Richards, with lavish and
suitably gaudy colour. Only Mr. Lucas's actions, therefore, arose
believe that, because of their odd accents, they act oddly like the
queer foreigners of tradition.
To paraphrase his well-known ditty: He'll have the
I have a hunch that he will feel more at home in the old,
star-studded West End than he will ever feel in Hollywood.
His American bosses, 20th-Century Fox, have recently given
Frankie the full, razzamataz, red-carpet treatment.
But they haven't done a thing for his film career that Anna
Neagle and Herbert Wilcox were not doing better here, before the
swamped by the know-how of Marilyn Monroe and Yves Montand. Against
a glum business.
get a break in the Hollywood ratrace.
waitress (Juliet Prowse) and cynically uses a magazine editress
(Martha Hyer) to get ahead.
jump into the Hollywood arena.
VERDICT: Vaughan should have by-passed this approach.
Fear (Warner Theatre, X).
which half the cast try to persuade the heroine that she is out of her
Despite flagrant cheating the eerie atmosphere is built up
Stepmother Ann Todd and doctor Christopher Lee are also
effectively around.
thriller.
VERDICT: Don't believe all you see and hear!
NOT for the first time the homely mug of Sidney James has
He does his rescue act in Double Bunk (Leicester-square
Strength
Carmichael and Janette Scott let loose their ancient houseboat on a
The film starts off brightly enough but, half-way through, the
plot (as well as the boat) springs a near-disastrous leak.
character-actors jump through equally familiar hoops to mild laughter.
DONALD HOUSTON had a big success on A T V's Drama
'61 last night as a smooth, scheming jewel thief in a play by
quick pace and everyone did well.
But it was Mr. Houston's evening.
Earlier, on the Palladium show I found Stanley Holloway's act too
long and not particularly entertaining.
chimpanzees so soon after their previous appearance.
on this show a week or so ago. But the Mudlarks, with Jeff Mudd out
of the Army and back with sister Mary and brother Fred, were in
bright, zestful form.
A FAIR COP, the B B C Whitehall farce last night,
looked like a rabbit warren in a field of corn.
Rix lost his skirt instead of his trousers.
The action moved at tremendous speed, backed by some wonderful
timing by the cast.
I especially liked the tea-cup scene where six of the cast
They alone used a sharp edge to their humour and cut through the
gormless standing corn around them. Perhaps it was accidental &mdash; I
If ever a bag of humour needed a thorough shaking up the
IT'S AN OLD PIANNA PIN-UP
ON THE RECORD
by Patrick Doncaster
Sing slightly flat. All the good singers sing in tune.
Twang a guitar slightly off key. Everybody's fed up with the
right way &mdash; so the best-seller charts say. Play an OLD pianna
You got to get it into your head, son... people don't like
things as they should be &mdash; not on record, anyway.
He did, on his piano at home. There weren't enough tacks and he
got only the middle hammers done.
Then he tried it out for sound.
company.
first session.
Now along comes his solo disc, featuring two of his own
might have been so different....
More news from the ivory-thumping dept.... Russ Conway,
who has tinkled his way to fame on an old pianna, comes in with
another of his own works: Parade of the Poppets (Columbia).
CUTE
GERMANY'S Russ Conway is a pianist who calls himself CRAZY
OTTO. But nothing crazy about his pianistics.
He pounds merrily away at a piece called Piccadilly
Now or Never, looks like having a success on his own with On the
Rebound (RCA).
NEW boy on the vocal front is Rolly Daniels, who comes
5,000 miles from India to seek disc fame.
Comedian Hal Monty saw him in Bombay, became his manager. And
such is Hal's faith that he brings him to Europe.
You're a star....
good start.
CHRIS CHARLES, 39, who lives in Stockton-on-Tees, is an
accountant. He is also a director of a couple of garages.
And he finds time as well to be a lyric writer.
OBLIGED
He writes with Tolchard Evans, composer of Lady of
Spain and other big hits.
Tolch, as he is known in Tin Pan Alley, likes songs with a month
Mr. Charles obliged with April Serenade.
This week it appears, a tuneful melody sung impeccably by Robert
A PRODUCER VANISHES
PRODUCER Russell Turner, 33, provides his last programme for
the B B C tonight with Robert Harbin's Mystery and Magic
aiming to go into free-lance T V, film and stage production work.
8.25).
NATIONAL AIRS
A SONGS-OF-BRITAIN medley is sung by David Hughes in his
Make Mine Music (B B C, 9.30 p.m.).
McNamara's Band, Greensleeves and English Rose.
THREE people will be hypnotised in tonight's Lifeline
(B B C, 10.15).
They will be asked to comment on the design of everyday
articles such as a chair and a motor-car.
The idea is to see what happens when parts of the mind not
normally available without hypnosis are used.
I T V have postponed Malcolm Muggeridge's Appointment
with playwright Arnold Wesker.
the Premier of the Federation of Rhodesia and Nyasaland (10.30
Say Granada T V, the producers: We decided to make the
interview will be seen at a later date.
LAST NIGHT'S TV
The soldier who was scared
I T V's Private Potter, his first big T V part.
stated that a fighting man could only be regarded as a machine.
Potter screamed during an action, and was arrested. He claimed
he had seen a vision of God &mdash; only the padre and his C O believed
him.
eyes. They stripped him of his ugly battle-dress, to leave him for
It was a splendid interpretation of the part.
The rest of the cast were well chosen, with James Maxwell
making a fine job of the sympathetic C O.
IMPOSSIBLE? &mdash; NO!
Paul Daneman gave another first-class performance last night as
He captured the atmosphere of fog and mystery to great effect.
LAST NIGHT'S T V
by RICHARD SEAR
MORE than 100 viewers complained to the B B C last night
that an American film, Britain &mdash; Blood, Sweat, and Tears... Plus
Twenty Years, was anti-British.
programmes because of an electricians' strike.
The film covered a wide aspect of the British scene, ranging from
pubs, the Eton wall game, to the European Common Market.
Shelagh Delaney and Alan Sillitoe attacked education.
criticisms. He said that in the race of the modern nations, Britain
Fine Classical Chorus
Imparting Ritual Significance
Scala Theatre: The Choephori.
chorus to the modern stage had some chances of expression in his
Sophocles, and the ritual element in the drama, always a stumbling
block for modern audiences, is much closer to the surface. In the
In the second they become the Furies, the embodiments of one
Mr. Rondiris's handling of the chorus here is masterly
throughout: in The Choephori they still perform the function of
sympathetic decor, as in Electra, but if anything with more
to their words for a modern audience.
In The Eumenides they are different again; as the Furies
pursuing Orestes they take a direct part in the action, and are thus
the emotions of the central characters. Savage and weirdly masked,
very end the regular, balanced compositions of the earlier play.
D. Veakis has more chance than he had in the Sophocles to win us
changed places this time (presumably so that Miss Aspassia
Papathanassiou could appear in both plays, as Clytemnestra and her
Clytemnestra, but inevitably Miss Papathanassiou with her incandescent
attention every moment she is on the scene and it is a measure of her
it is not the harmony of the close, but Clytemnestra's ghost crying in
The exhibition of English and French engravings of the
43, Old Bond Street, until July 8, is a pleasant reminder mainly of
the age of the coloured aquatint though it includes also examples of
Monument de Costume.
prints as Debucourt's La Promenade Publique of 1792, the view
of Westminster Hall and Abbey engraved by D. Havell after J.
Glendall, and the now rare coaching subjects of James Pollard of which
The Royal Mails preparing to start for the West of England, 1831
(from the Swan with Two Necks, Cheapside) is a notable example.
from Boydell's History of the River Thames and some interesting
Parthenon (Dodwell-Bennett) as it must have appeared shortly after
Lord Elgin had removed the Marbles. The sporting prints by
Herring and Alken are good examples of an always popular genre.
Suzanne Eisendieck may be suitably described as confections and
The exhibition continues until June 30.
Moral Earnestness in Ballet
The social and aesthetic climate of Soviet ballet is so
the view that art should be a guide and mentor for the people, which
will strike us as naive or old-fashioned; yet this would not perhaps
The choreographic manner &mdash; where the hero's leaps are an
initial excitement which too often declines into dramatic clich&eacute;,
to the detriment of our western enjoyment of the dancing as a stage
These are the very faults of The Stone Flower with which the
night. The plot tells of a stone-cutter, Danila, loving a young girl,
perfect stone flower takes him to a magical cavern, presided over by
Mistress of the Mountain, who reluctantly lets him go.
of Soviet ballet, an interesting one, and an unusual departure from
d&eacute;cor; instead, a back drop rises to reveal the various changes for
black wings.
The choreography is the first major creation of the young Yuri
of a large work. For Danila and Katerina he uses a free-flowering
and gipsies, and he shows a remarkable gift for movement for a large
corps de ballet of jewels that seem fidgety and sterile exercises
in academic movement, lacking any originality.
The three principals are admirable: as Danila, Mr. Yuri
Soloviev gives a tremendous performance; he has a prodigious technique
in leaps and turns, he is a fine partner, and conveys that sense of
the Mountain Miss Alla Sizova and Miss Alla Osipenko are well
The company are seen best in the character dances; as peasants
and gypsies in a fair scene that inevitably recalls Petrushka they
show just how much dramatic variety can be obtained from a superb
difference that still exists between Leningrad and Moscow dancers;
MISS SILVIA KIND'S RECITAL
consistently interesting programme at Wigmore Hall last night, can
hardly be considered one just yet.
An attack of nerves in Bach's Italian Concerto caused her to take
throughout much of the remainder of it &mdash; most certainly could not.
The expressive powers of a harpsichord are by no means directly
proportionate to the number of registrations it possesses.
Bernardo Pasquini and Alessandro Poglietti the employment of a wide
variety of colour per se seemed appropriate enough; in
Mozart, however (the Duport variations K.573), such superficial
treatment chopped up the music altogether too much.
which Miss Kind ended her recital, combined some splendidly bold and
and nobility of outline. It suggested, in fact, that Miss Kind is a
very much better harpsichordist than this recital as a whole revealed.
Thirteen second-year students appeared in last night's
performance, and one's judgment of them might have been fairer, if the
failure to make the first two items work as play, was irritating, and
caused one to undervalue even those pieces of acting which obviously
had merit, such as those of Miss Jocelyn Carney in Act 1 of The
The cast of the third piece, The Dark Lady of the Sonnets,
did not reach a noticeably higher standard than that of Mr.
Curtis (Shakespeare), Miss Gabrielle Griffin (Queen Elizabeth 1),
prepared from then onwards to be satisfied with everything. But to
accept so much help from Shaw and themselves to give so little help to
Punishment
FROM OUR SPECIAL CORRESPONDENT
Two stage versions of Raskolnikoff have been presented here
season's repertory of the Stadtheater. Seen here on consecutive days
each other &mdash; and in many ways from the book itself &mdash; as current
Mr. Ahlsen's play might well have been given the alternative
to the political, metaphysical, religious, and moral aspects of the
subject under discussion, namely, the taking of human life.
the thursday critics
KENNETH ALLSOP
BEHAN BESTOWS AN ACCOLADE ON DELANEY
IT is mid-morning on a Dublin Sunday. The streets are
tranquilly sunny and still, for the town is at Mass. Most of it. In
inches in the bottle.
Present are some hard-core Friends of Brendan. They listen with
many an obliging guffaw to the brandy owner's solo swish on his
air or a Connemara tear-jerker.
Pluckily
The Hostage about his new work, if any, and who is now being
sniffing the wind and offering to drop by for a chat.
At last Brendan &mdash; to the journalist's relief &mdash; turns his
literary hierarchy.
I consider myself, he says, a cut above Evelyn Waugh
But, he continues, the greatest is Shelagh Delaney. Just
limiting label of working-class writer. That's as bloody silly as
calling a Rolls-Royce a type of transport. She's the flower in a
cultural desert.
educate. And I don't write at all unless I'm exceedingly skint.
advantage that no one knows what you're writing about anyway.
went up &mdash; what's his name? I'm the only man on earth who doesn't know
what his name is. Don't tell me. I want to preserve that
distinction.
HE plunges on into reminiscences of his trips. There is
Patrick's Day parade as a disorderly person.
space-flight: Ireland will put a shillelagh into orbit, Israel will
And he suffered an alcoholic seizure and was gravely ill in
heard of often in the newspapers &mdash; three times up before the beaks for
Partially
years since his first play, The Quare Fellow, was produced, three
What has happened to the play, Richard's Cork Leg, begun 18
What happened to the new book partially tape-recorded by his
planned to be called Confessions of an Irish Rebel which was
delivered to his agents in June.
Zestfully
IT begins: There was a party to celebrate Deirdre's
brilliantly observant of character, and authentic as a glass of
draught porter.
pub where the author throws a &pound;10 note on to the bar and orders a
round for the pals, one of whom cries: Now aren't you the great
It is apparently praise that is still so important to him that he
lets his talent drown &mdash; for not very deep under the histrionics of
having a zest for life must be a great fear of living.
BOOKS IN BRIEF
STEPHEN MORRIS, by Nevil Shute (Heinemann, 16s.). This
first attempt at novel writing &mdash; two unpublished stories from the
interest devotees, but, despite the accurate flying-lore and natural
L. S. LOWRY (Studio books, 21s.). The Painters of
Today series issues this attractive collection of the work of perhaps
There is a warm and illuminating monograph by Mervyn Levy.
PULL MY DAISY (Evergreen Books, 10s. 6d.). Jack
including Allen Ginsberg and Gregory Corso. It reads like a demented
and with the beat between their teeth.
THE NEW FILMS
technique.
It gives one loud, clear hiccup and falls flat on its back.
pushful personal manager.
The performance of our talented feathered friend is not the only
good thing (although the one original touch) in the film, which is
NIGHTIES
neglig&eacute;e-and-nightie ensembles not too well designed for sleeping
in, and Rock Hudson at the wheel of a shining silver Rolls-Royce.
Mr. Hudson is an American millionaire who spends each September
his major-domo (Walter Slezak at his most nauseating) turns the
Inevitably there comes the time when Mr. Hudson suddenly breaks
with tradition and arrives there in July, when, just as inevitably,
the place is full of American teenagers on an escorted tour.
Result: Mr. Hudson and lady love Lollo find themselves playing
chaperon (Brenda \de Banzie, the official one, has broken a leg) to
the girls, who have just been joined by a Jeep-load of boys.
It's hereabouts that the budge takes to the bottle, but I don't
think it was through boredom.
The film is funny enough in places and has a line or two of
GOODIES
I don't want to talk like an adult, screams Gina, walking
out on the man who has so far failed to make an honest woman of her.
Of course Mr. Hudson can take one more hill than the
youngsters. So all ends as you know it will, with the middle-aged
romancers respectably wed and Master Darin going steady with the
life).
Miss Dee, incidentally, who keeps turning up as the typical
teenager in all the good girl parts (Tuesday Weld gets the bad
STUDIES
look-out that the jokes about sex (what else would they joke about
unbelievably elegant household of a pair of married college
The girl is a knock-out (see picture of Julie Newmar for
She, younger, prettier, stronger, and more intelligent than
the wife (as she soon tells her), wants to have the perfect baby. And
she has chosen the husband (James Mason), who is an academic friend of
This sort of situation calls for some subtle, slightly sardonic
handling. It doesn't get it.
But The Marriage-Go-Round is not entirely a waste of time. I
learned from it that in the Institutes of Advanced Studies attached to
called Home-making and is now known as Domestic Relations.
Susan Hayward plays the wife sharply and sweetly. Mason is
always good for a glower. And Miss Newmar is a stunner in every sense
of the word.
According to the script she was once captain of the junior hockey
in atmospheric meandering by the L'Avventura man, Michelangelo
In it Steve Cochran, deserted by Alida Valli, roams the Pontine
Marshes, alternately enjoying the hospitality of three lonely,
sex-starved women, before returning home.
Maybe this is a masterpiece, too. I just wouldn't know.
the thursday critics
the century
household the nursemaid tiptoed into the baby's room to see that
20-month-old Charles Jun. was sleeping.
Bending over the cot, she suddenly realised that there was no
sound of breathing. She thrust out her hand &mdash; and felt emptiness.
A FEW minutes later the father gripping a loaded rifle, told
It was not only their baby &mdash; it was America's. The grief of the
young parents became a national agony that erupted into hysteria when
today, Hamish Hamilton 30s.), is a painstaking, meticulous account
The plain, sober manner of its style all the more tellingly
points up not only the horror of the case itself, which floundered on
to the electrocution four years later of a German-born Bronx carpenter
TOULOUSE-LAUTREC AT THE TATE
Vigour and Decay
By David Sylvester
He doesn't, on the one hand, use them as symbols, pegs for a
example among many); and on the other hand, he doesn't use them only
different set of gestures. He is concerned with them as they are and
also for what they are.
The artist and his obsessions
obsessions of their life into their art &mdash; not in a direct way. A poet
who is drunk doesn't necessarily write Odes to Bacchus. A painter who
loves whores doesn't have to paint whores in order to express in art
express this better by painting duchesses or cats or velvet-curtained
rooms.
In painting whores and entertainers, Lautrec was choosing to
having been a cripple from birth, but from an age, fourteen, by which
he had acquired some relish in using his body, in riding and shooting.
He must have suffered not only from knowing what a monster he was
body. This perhaps is what gave him a fascination with bodies that
were agile, bodies that could do what was asked of them, and bodies
that others wanted to use.
become, as his had, useless and hideous and unwanted, and that they
animal vigour and grace; on the other, celebration of the knowledge
that they too would fall into decrepitude. For it is not a present
state of decay that Lautrec presents as a rule, but only an intimation
of decay.
close, rejoice in recoiling from their enlarged pores. He paints them
flesh. His women are excitingly depraved, but they aren't sick, they
the painter, by transmitting to canvas the tautness and flexibility
He is no moralist, then; he doesn't use art as a means of
revenge. He is no Expressionist, inflicting (like those Central
upon the appearance of his whores an idea of their inner corruption,
making their bodies reflect the supposed state of their souls. He
paints them in all their ambiguity. He paints the presence of their
beautiful vitality, the promise of their decay, the process of
Watteau. Watteau, dangerously delicate in health, paints a world of
used-up. The transience of youth is the common theme, and Lautrec as
much as Watteau is a truly tragic artist in that he communicates not
The Arts Council show of paintings and drawings at the Tate is
not a major exhibition. It consists of a selection of works from the
shows how his art was based on a wonderfully sure grasp of form in the
round. There are a number of notable drawings and sketches. But of
his finest paintings there are no more than a handful.
AT THE GALLERIES
Brave New Age of Bronze
energy and rugged form, rather than his aspirations, which have
Browse's).
Ralph Brown began as a social realist sculptor infusing
or more lively movement, is well seen in the swing of an adolescent
girl and in some fine figure drawings. But recently his sculptural
conceptions, carried out in ciment fondu for bronze, have
and references to the ribbed torso, his images also resemble the
growth of trees. Thus his forms have become bunched, with knobbly
THIS WORKS well in the more fluid forms of his swimmers where
his humanistic standing figures. Henry Moore's stylisation is
shoulders, whose first impression of brute strength yields to a sense
of uncertain architecture and even pretentiousness. The search for a
synthesis, a metaphor for tough masculinity, continues. Brown is
happiest here in recent reliefs as sensitive as the shapes of his
swimmers surfacing.
Rome, and the exuberant baroque of his prancing hybrid figures is as
clearly Italianate as his rugged porters are Rodinesque. Italy has
cruciform design of the beast with rearing neck and spreadeagled legs
against the long goad. One admires the inventive interplay of hard,
the torture. Aplomb is a cooling quality.
with his recent bronzes sparely arranged at Waddington's galleries. I
was quite unsympathetic to his earlier surrealist figures, dismembered
here as a reminder of them. His more recent shield-like emblems or
textured and symbolic relief sometimes appears positive on the front,
negative on the back surface. The mood is equivocal, more capricious
communes in the hollow of a great saucer. A beacon seen on the shore
inscrutable menace of the visor still preserved. His personality is
How it is that Celtic mystery and individual beauty can coalesce
in a flaky, metal shield on prongs is hard to say in simple terms. It
is simplest to say that McWilliam's restless fancy has found
THE CHARACTERS OF LOVE. By John Bayley. (Constable. 21s.)
By PHILIP TOYNBEE
THE ambiguous title reveals, by the end of this book, a
potentiality of men and women which keeps them most interested in each
and Criseyde, Othello and The Golden Bowl to illustrate
In a sense the theme of love is secondary to Mr. Bayley's main
purpose, which is to vindicate his faith in the supremacy of
old Dickensian hacks have been bemoaning Pickwick and Micawber ever
since novelists and critics first began their resolute march in a
makes it, I believe, a critical work of the first importance, is that
modern criticism and modern fictional practice.
I shall allow him, where possible, to speak for himself. Of
Chaucer it is muted, peculiar, full of objects that are unexpected and
of effect reminds us ... of the novel. And against the many
hostile critics of the play he suggests that they have adopted the
false premise of supposing that the great play should be impersonal,
that the quirks and undercurrents of individual psychology should be
swallowed up in a grand tragic generality.
because:-
unique emphasis.
BOOK REVIEWS
THE DESTRUCTION OF LORD RAGLAN: A Tragedy of the Crimean War. By
By RAYMOND MORTIMER
THERE never was a Crimean War: the whole story must be the
invention of some satirist frantic with hatred for warfare and
of its origins is restricted to three colourless pages, for he writes
campaign. The picture that emerges is often, however, too horrid to
To vindicate Lord Raglan, the Commander-in-Chief, is his
purpose &mdash; as it was Kinglake's; but Kinglake was animated also with
hatred of Napoleon 3, with whose mistress he had been in love; and
me far the most trustworthy account yet written of the Crimean
obscure fighting men. He quotes also from Russian books that have not
THE battles are described in great detail and illustrated
vermiculated hills. Readers who share my distrust of such tactical
hand-to-hand tussles in the fog. Unfortunately the author throws
little light upon the military departments at home, which with their
archaic incompetence and divided responsibilities were chiefly to
Russian troops, who were quickly expelled by the Turks with no help
captured it was, but with no lasting advantage to us or our allies.
Experienced Generals from our Indian Army were available, but
men who had seen active service, if at all, not less than thirty-nine
years previously. Two of them suffered from feeble eyesight; one
the most part shoddy, boots that fell to pieces, swords so soft that
they would bend instead of cutting.
marine in the world, these could not bring enough supplies for our
expeditionary force; and cargoes moreover were allowed to rot
unloaded. The two admirals were at odds with one another. The
commissioners in charge of supplies, when asked for a few nails,
against the Russian winter, our troops died in their thousands: lack
of fodder killed the horses and mules; there was no other transport.
The C.O. of the Grenadiers would not allow a mere line regiment
to fight on the flank of his beautiful Guardsmen, who were therefore
compelled to retreat in disorder.
staggering courage. Gradually those who survived grew bitter; the
reinforcements were for the most part raw recruits; morale collapsed.
campaign had been better equipped, better fed and better led.
Worn out by his labours, insulted in Parliament and by the Press,
no longer supported by his Queen, Raglan had died three months
previously. A wiser man would not have accepted the command at the
amiable. He behaved to the French with exemplary and invaluable
patience. But then he proved equally patient with the military
departments at home that were murdering his troops. He could not bear
Creature of Habit
WE cannot refuse him our pity. He worked himself to death
at a Herculean task for which he was fitted by neither character nor
the previous twenty-eight years Secretary at the Horse Guards
Army. He was described by Palmerston as a creature of habit; and
in the Crimea he found himself a victim of the grotesque system he had
they are improvements may, like Raglan, be a good man. He cannot be a
good Commander-in-Chief.
was nothing in life like a clear definition, and during his years of
one of the qualities that made him so great a commander; as with
art.
possible force in the fewest possible words &mdash; and I can think of no
better definition &mdash; Wellington was a very good writer. His military
correspondence, like his recorded conversation, is delightful reading.
IT is not very agreeable to anybody, he reminded a
complaining Portuguese magnate, to have strangers quartered in his
in our own country, to be obliged to seek for quarters here. We are
not here for our pleasure; the situation of your country renders it
necessary. Could anything be neater?
Or anything more true than this? Half the business of the
world, particularly that of our country, is done by accommodation and
by the parties understanding each other.
Or this, quoted by Mr. Brett-James in his admirable
channels of intelligence are of doubtful fidelity. I should find it
very difficult to point out what channels of intelligence I have: but
probably Mr&hellip; . knows.
selection from Wellington's letters. Most of them are taken from
Dispatches of the Duke of Wellington and from the fifteen volumes
I will not say that no better selection could have been made;
In deference to the reading tastes of our day Mr. Brett-James's
compass is far smaller.
equally good and equally representative, could have been made from the
of Wellington's genius &mdash; his clarity, his good sense, his powers of
wants more.
been approached about the return to England of a major whose fianc&eacute;e
I cannot say that I have ever known of a young lady dying of
notwithstanding their despair and the continued absence of their
inclined to take another lover, if the absence of the first has lasted
recover so far, but I do hope that she will survive the continued
happy days.
ADVICE FOR A LADY IN LOVE
TO A YOUNG ACTRESS: The Letters of Bernard Shaw to Molly
By HESKETH PEARSON
FOR sheer entertainment and humorous common sense the
This oddity in his nature appears again and again in his letters
well over a hundred letters and post-cards between 1921 and his death.
it has happened to me twice. It does not last, because it does not
belong to this earth; and when you clasp the idol it turns out to be a
you grab at it. But while he was content with dreams of fair
women, they were looking for something more corporeal, which he could
lives.
Tompkins are reproduced in photostat. With a few alterations carbon
and the advantage of using it when interviewing managers, on the
correct pronunciation of words, on how to behave as a mother and the
Italy, on the necessity in England of putting Esq. not
on the expediency of keeping a parrot instead of a dog: Parrots are
amusing, and never die. You wish they did.
crystallised in a phrase, e.g., ~Learning to live is like
learning to skate: you begin by making a ridiculous spectacle of
yourself, and ~The fear of God may be the beginning of wisdom,
useless to try to help people whom God does not mean to be helped.
Keeping The Beasts In Their Place
ANGUS WILSON, The Old Men at the Zoo. Secker &amp; Warburg, 18s.
OUR island, it would appear, is too small to allow even
for the controlled return of the wolf, the bear and the boar.
so in his new novel, which is set in London in 1970. There is no
reason to doubt that his sober, careful verdict on the danger of
The matter is mentioned because the puzzle of Mr. Wilson's new
This was never a problem in Mr. Wilson's early days. His first
books of short stories were as clear as only crystals of poison can
be, and the horrors he held up to our inspection were almost too
recognisable to be faced.
But, since then, Mr. Wilson has widened both his medium and his
a more distressed hand &mdash; in brief, he is no longer a pure satirist.
author should be allowed to change as he pleases: the only test is the
quality of the result.
The Old Men at the Zoo has much to commend it. It has been
written with great feeling and it has some very enjoyable characters
in it. It is also a very just book, in that the most absurd
characters are allowed their virtues and dignities. Even when it is
cross, angry and spiteful, it is still a kindly book.
The difficulty is to know exactly how to find one's way about in
If this is correct, then much of Mr. Wilson's symbolism becomes
easy to follow. We see clearly that if the Zoo is to be decently
conducted, those who govern it must do so unselfishly, intelligently
and civilisedly.
They must also realise that animals are tricky, even dangerous,
beasts, and must not feel sentimental about tarantulas and lynxes.
of the animal that suit their professional interests &mdash; an extreme (and
they are dead, dissection being his forte.
These persons, let us say, are the department chiefs and top
assistant-keepers who carry out their orders. But above them all
frame Zoo policy and fight over what this policy should be; these two
Whipsnadian reserves. The Secretary thinks this is nonsense.
Animals, he insists, are best off in the cosy, though somewhat
cramped, cages designed for them by the great Victorian, Decimus
Burton.
animals are first-rate &mdash; particularly as he is most honest about them,
liberty, or is the Times right in concluding that they are too
This problem becomes acutely personal to every reader when a
liberated wolf eats the Director's daughter. Thousands of innocent
animals have to pay for the wolf's indiscretion by being shut up in
Regent's Park again. Is this fair?
Mr. Wilson does not say whether it is fair or not. And by the
end of the book we realise that the puzzles and hypotheses which he
questions.
confusion in practice. Mr. Wilson's novel, one feels, would have
been remarkably good if he had stuck strictly to the Zoo. Instead, he
has filled out his canvas of the future with a war in which England is
invaded and crushed by combined European armies (Russia and America
agree not to intervene). He has put in saboteurs, and spies, and
has put in more matter than he can handle and made an artistic clutter
of his humane worries.
His novel is still a good one &mdash; but the careful, precise pen of
People On The Move
By ANTHONY QUINTON
HOWARD SPRING, I Met a Lady, Collins, 21s.
FOR topicality, Alasdair Clayre's first novel The Window
The central figures are a decent, devout, inarticulate organist
pretty batman whose ambition is to be a butler.
pianist. The organist, Matthew and James get caught up, in different
point of view shifting from one of the main characters to another. In
its course Mr. Clayre conducts his readers on a convincingly
authoritative tour of a wide variety of pre-eminently contemporary
scenes: an assembly-line, an officers' mess, a jazz club, a left-wing
realism has the thinness of a cross-section. The Sands family are not
characters Mr. Clayre likes, the organist and Anna for example, who
are honoured with a less rigid and political treatment. But this is
an able and intelligent book whose limitations reflect the magnitude
of its ambitions.
The Mighty and their Fall is absolutely standard Ivy
Experts could no doubt identify most of the characters and
Compton-Burnett's curious instrument grates on some ears, but for
should be read at a sitting if possible, since the plot and characters
are only revealed by the cumulative effect of the dialogue.
The centre of this novel is the struggle between a widowed father
second marriage, he to prevent her inheriting his brother's money. He
has a more impersonal justification in his concern for the continuing
Miss Compton-Burnett's vertiginous economies both of technique
what she manages to do with what is left; but they also reflect, as
much as Racine's, a judgment of importance, of what really matters in
Howard Spring's I Met a Lady is, predictably and honourably,
a thoroughly good read &mdash; the whole quarter of a million words of it.
throwing a few human types together at random to see what would come
that allows him to indulge his pronounced negative capability as a
nice rich actress and what with her connections and the family of a
tycoon who unaccountably becomes his friend he has plenty to look in
upon and make harmlessly facetious remarks about. It is a
pleasant-spirited, old-fashioned book and pretends to do no more than
tell an only mildly engrossing story.
H. D.'s Bid Me to Live, a small, handsomely-produced
volume, is described as a madrigal of war-time love and death in the
London of 1917. It recounts in short, hectic and often verbless
sentences the inner life of Julia Ashton, a sensitive American married
volcanic novels married to an ample German aristocrat, is in love
with her.
IN BRIEF
By The Danube
fantasy told with perfect light touch. Delightful surprise ending.
16s. Neatly-constructed whydunit. Members of unexpected suicide's
last carefree dinner party all dig into her apparently blameless past.
Skilful maintenance of suspense right up to not-too-unlikely
Glaswegian on the run from his native slums finds London can mean
luxury &mdash; at an unpleasant price. Convincing Glasgow beginning tails
author. Bad characters good, good characters bad.
Children in Love BY MOIRA VERSCHOYLE, Hodder, 15s.
Glamorous worldly-wise 17-year-old disrupts backwoods Anglo-Irish
adolescent triangle. Tragic ending to a golden summer in well-evoked
By DESMOND SHAWE-TAYLOR
THE score of Falstaff seems to have ripened against a
warm orchard wall. It is all juice and goodness, firm flesh and sweet
This is one of music's miracles; and the miracle was achieved by
Franco Zeffirelli's new production, unveiled at Covent Garden
last Wednesday, was eagerly awaited after his romantic Lucia and
not to mention his more controversial Romeo and Juliet at the Old
Vic. His Falstaff, though likely to prove a hit, is again
Dramatically, it is a hotchpotch: imaginative, eccentric, frequently
crude.
Gang, though without their sublime impudence; for if Messrs.
Naughton and Gold had played Pistol and Bardolph, they would at least
only is a poor word, for they achieved a good deal. For
instance, Geraint Evans's admirable delivery of the Honour tirade was
insisted on nodding a tireless and zany affirmative.
Thence to Ford's garden, a sort of inn courtyard: striking.
Enter two letter-carrying Wives (Mariella Angioletti and Josephine
Of course, she runs the entire show; the only surprise is that she
didn't get a letter too. If so wild a misinterpretation can be
fault of Signora Angioletti, who on the first night continually
allowed her phrases to vanish in mid-utterance as though the current
had been cut off. The explanation can hardly be a failure of voice,
IN the second act things began to improve, although Mrs.
Quickly's famous deep curtseys on the word \Reverenza! were
all was the great scene between Ford and Falstaff, where no misplaced
ingenuity was allowed to impair our pleasure in the excellent singing
in splendid form; particularly at the quiet end of Act 3, Scene 1,
voices, the magical chain of descending harmonies and the slowly
The tapestried interior of Ford's house made a delightful
spectacle, and the final scene opened in a vein of high romance, with
pale shafts of moonlight striking across the forest glade; but on the
arrival of the fairies Herne's Oak split asunder and soared aloft,
might have been conjured up by a Chagall given unlimited funds to
simplicity and honesty have fallen by the wayside. But the
it is the kind of showy production that makes such a phrase seem
natural. Great pleasure is given by Luigi Alva and Signora Freni as
robustness are demanded he is sometimes less happy. Mr. Evans
continues to ripen and improve his distinguished Falstaff, but we
within a less confusing framework.
of opera at Sadler's Wells with two much earlier Verdi operas: the
in London twice before, but it is now distinguished by a new Abigail
(Elizabeth Vaughan) who tackled her very difficult music with
remarkable aplomb and accuracy, if she can enrich her timbre she might
vigorously but with a faulty sense of legato by the Welsh choir.
Press statement called a rather dated incident in the 12th
become an episode of the Italian Resistance during the German
occupation. Modern diction and ways of thought were, however, not
consistently adopted. In one of Verdi's furious cabalettas (husband
discovering wife's supposed infidelity) ~Trema! trema! coppia
esecrata! became ~Damn you! damn you! pair of dirty liars!;
(standard post-box for operatic missives), it instantly stung her
like a serpent.
Notwithstanding such quaint distractions, the power and the
beauty of Verdi's invention in the last two acts could be perceived.
The Welsh Opera continues to deserve our gratitude, but could
learn much in the way of vocal style from a surprisingly vocal
WELSH NIGHT
Between them, Cardiff and St. Pancras ensure that not a
the Welsh National Opera Company for bringing, if only for a single
May Night, a folksy precursor of the more sophisticated
orientalisms of Sadko and The Golden Cockerel, proved a
Jones (Anna) and Heather Harper (Queen of the Roussalki) well-suited
not Phyllis Ash Child's completely un-shrewish Sister-in-law.
Sally Hulke's sets and John Moody's production, like the chorus,
Boito's Mefistofele remains the Company's most imaginative
production. Triumphing ingeniously over space, it depicts Heaven and
confidence. Under Warwick Braithwaite the orchestra recovered pitch,
the angelic chorus of the Prologue than their golden wings.
F. A.
What Every Guru Knows
ON Wednesday night, when my pampered colleagues were borne in
ootocoids at the Fortune, this Cinderella among critics made his way
NOW, though I would not go as far as to agree with the
sisters performing, is in the enveable position of being above
controversy, she has learnt some of Bharata Natya and she gets by.
Radha and Vasanti are graceful, too. It is how their brother Mr.
Kumar got on stage that beats me &mdash; unless, of course, he is really
sisters perfecting themselves in their art, he suddenly couldn't bear
utterly in his mission. Dance inspires him ceaselessly to strive
higher and higher towards the shining pinnacle of perfection that is
the goal of every Artiste.
Kathak, with its swift spins, is what bedizened boys used to
dance before Mogul Emperors. Mr. Kumar rashly did it stripped to
got up much speed, and made few turns. What he did do was to fix us
with a basilisk stare, make odd pointing gestures and keep improvising
for about twenty minutes. A polite attempt to drive him offstage with
Eventually his attention wandered from his work, and his eye hit
bell, not four hundred. Starting with the full carillon (if
one bell, but at least six. Then he started dancing again.
THE able drummer, the flautist who was a worthy disciple
to the great living Flute Wizard Sri T. R. Mahalingam, Mali to
his innumerable fans, and the nice lady singer who let it be
known that she was married to Mr. Narian who was a dancing partner
authenticity of timbre and interpretation.
two are alike in specification or sound, so that discs of organ music
played on the very instrument for which it was conceived deserve an
the organist's warhorse, at Saint-Sulpice. Now, his pupil and
successor, Marcel Dupr&eacute;, himself in his seventies and a pioneer of
organ records, has re-recorded it there in a coupling with Widor's
fifth and Gothic symphonies which shows how well his master
his own music, and Vol. 5 which also includes Les bergers,
kind of noise behind them.
Another Dupr&eacute; pupil, the Belgian Flor Peeters, has recorded
music and a clearer sound. A splendid record. (HMV &mdash; mono.)
QUESTION
Why has this face appeared among the best-sellers?
have stared out at the readers of a succession of heavy literary
her name at the top of the list of best-selling novelists.
her fifth novel, she has been sifted out by the priests of culture for
their own honours list. Her name has acquired an almost visible halo.
For those who wish to impress, it can now be plopped confidently
into a conversation like French seasoning upon a salad.
Monitor will be leading TV cameras around Miss Murdoch's
appropriate to a cathedral.
DEGENERATE
Yet, despite all this attention, no one has mentioned the
It is not its characters, which are unbelievable, nor its
background, which is inaccurate and unreal.
Department is, by the standards of most people, utterly degenerate.
booksellers, not all by any means in the back streets, who gloat over
condemnation of their wares with the relish with which some film
Yet A Severed Head has already been given its X by the
mandarin reviewers. Their coy or leering references to its plot have
to offer a corrective.
PLEASED
Hands, while (with a tense demure consciousness of his gaze)
Lynch-Gibbon is pleased with life. His wife Antonia, though a
and knows nothing about Georgie. Then, piece by piece, Lynch-Gibbon's
Antonia falls in love with her American psychiatrist and goes to
telling Antonia.
psychiatrist lover for deceiving them over Georgie. Then Lynch-Gibbon
both hands pushing and clawing, and endeavoured to drive her knee into
After this encounter, Lynch-Gibbon decides that he is
in Cambridge, gets in through an open door, and finds her in bed with
her psychiatrist half-brother.
Before the book ends Georgie gives herself first to
Lynch-Gibbon's brother, Alexander, and then to the psychiatrist.
Miss Klein.
psychiatrist too.
Such is the novel which Mr. Cyril Connolly greeted as a
interviewer, to give as his judgment: She has the rare universal
Which, I believe you will decide, is all my rare universal eye
and Betty Martin.
SO WRONG
True, the praise has not been unrelieved. Mr. Connolly
himself pointed out that Miss Murdoch, having chosen a wine merchant
Mr. Philip Toynbee, with some justice, wrote: Though she
Mr. Peter Forster likened Miss Murdoch's dialogue to Ethel
M. Dell. Yet the striking thing is that none of these critics
I would not ask them to denounce it as pornography. A Severed
Head is not pornography.
only an extreme masochist could drive himself to read it for the
over incest or homosexuality.
It does not enthuse. It does worse &mdash; it merely yawns.
It enshrines the bored and disgusted-by-nothing attitude of that
shallow but influential clique which dominates the literary weeklies
little boys who dare to remain mute while the rest of the dormitory is
university seems just the right background for her. But is
high the most apt word for Miss Murdoch's mind?
For this is not her only puzzling novel. In her often
brilliantly funny second book, Flight from the Enchanter, Rosa, a
sensible upper-middle-class young lady, befriends two Poles whom she
meets in a factory. She teaches them English in their sordid room in
looks on.
Occasionally the brothers dance round the mother or prod her with
soon kill you, we put you under floorboards, you not stink there worse
than here!
WATCHING
One day Rosa goes to meet the brothers and finds only one of
them, Stefan, waiting for her. He takes her to the room where he
watching eyes.
She not see, not hear, is the reply.
Jan replies sternly: Of course. And now is me.
nature of pity: the revulsion of feeling which an unequal relationship
inspires.
It may be, of course, that the stud-farm entanglements of Miss
Murdoch's latest book are also a brutal commentary on something's
Unfortunately, if they are, even Miss Murdoch's most
something is.
are occasionally more interested in yellow golliwogs than in the works
(Hamish Hamilton, 16s.) by Maurice Edelman, the suave,
John Galt, who wrote The Borough (subject: political jobbery) in
1832, and about A. E. W. Mason, best-known for The Four
own brief career as Liberal M.P. for Coventry).
Now, in The Minister I believe that Edelman has produced a
novel which itself deserves a very high place indeed in the roll of
It is certainly the novel which I have enjoyed most in 1961.
A reservation
every Tory Minister. He becomes Tory Prime Minister. But his public
plain but well-loved wife has also allowed herself to be well loved by
Set against this theme is the story of how Melville, having said:
I want the African to be my brother, adds in an indiscreet
whisper, but not my brother-in-law.
Edelman's approach to morals which &mdash; unlike Miss Murdoch's &mdash; is both
No, the disturbing thing about The Minister is that far from
No malice
it oh-so-civilised and cultured to be just a little weary and cynical
about everything.
But I must draw attention to one fairy-tale element in this
otherwise true-to-life novel. In avoiding any appearance of party
prejudice, Edelman goes so far as to put epigrams &mdash; yes, actual
FROM A NEW BOOK, AN INTRIGUING ACCOUNT OF LIFE IN THE LAND OF
MISTS
THE BOOK PAGE
it is fashionable to discuss the problem of old age. During the last
century it was reported that the people north of Cape Horn had solved
have ever read.
Life and Lincoln Barnett (Prentice-Hall, 70s.). You would
biologist in its midst the book is more than worth it.
In wonderful photographs and paintings it parades the bizarre
quirks of evolution &mdash; such as the dawn-flying silk moth, with its
A UNIQUE TONE OF VOICE
Any new translation of Cavafy is to be welcomed, especially
Professor Mavrogordato, has long been difficult to acquire. Thus this
were written as early as 1911 and he wrote poems in every subsequent
universe. And one is inclined to say that the slight angle
impossible to translate him in a way that is positively misleading.
The authentic voice is certain to come through.
The present translation by Miss Rae Dalven is no exception to the
in many of his poems. But on the whole the work is careful and exact.
volume has the advantage over the earlier one.
helped by Mr. Auden's introduction. Early on in this Mr. Auden
poetry is his unique tone of voice, there is nothing for a critic to
to be found in Sir Maurice Bowra's The Creative Experiment and in
Mr. Sherrard's The Marble Threshing Floor. These writers are
aware that one function of criticism is to explain and they avoid such
more remote from Cavafy than any of these. What is in fact the case
is that he was concerned with a view of a Greek's place in history, a
view which was peculiarly his own and which has been found by his
contemporaries and successors in the Greek tradition peculiarly true
and enlightening. It is a view taken from a slight angle to the
Nearly the whole of Cavafy's life was spent in Alexandria. This,
as can be seen when one knows Cavafy, was a fitting background. It
language and culture from the Indus to the far west. Of other Greek
cities only Athens and Constantinople have equally powerful
course, utterly different from the world of fifth-century Athens. It
was out of the world of the Greek dispersal that Cavafy created his
personal mythology &mdash; a world both of triumph and disaster, a world of
the universe of history. His favourite subjects are from Antioch,
Alexandria, Byzantium, or from Greek states already subjugated to
are encouraged to regard as decadent; and indeed so strong is
decadent to Cavafy's poetry. It is therefore refreshing to find
such a critic as Sir Maurice Bowra, who writes: ...respect for human
courage and character is perhaps Cavafy's most characteristic note.
in the poems that deal with love (always homosexual love). Here again
erotic world he depicts is one of casual pickups and short-lived
things emerges a splendour of which Mr. Auden seems unaware. Has he
However, Cavafy can speak, and has spoken, for himself. He has
and has already influenced poets in many other languages. His
combined with the accuracy of a surgeon, his awareness of the past in
observe and which, singly and together, make him one of the greatest
REBELS WITH A PEN
BRUCE INGHAM GRANGER: Political Satire in the American
Revolution, 1763-1783. 314pp. Cornell University Press. London:
Oxford University Press. 40s.
The American Revolution produced some first-class writing of the
solemn and more dignified types. Burke on one side of the Atlantic,
Jefferson on the other, rose to the height of the great argument. But
at work in North America during these twenty years. Dr. Granger
has gleaned most thoroughly and has classified various types of
political satire in a sensible fashion. But with the possible
burlesque much more completely forgotten than Hudibras. From the
point of view of American literary history, one of the chief types of
contemporary Charles Churchill.
competence. They are, however, bold in the use of rhyme to a degree
that would astonish Mr. Ogden Nash. Thus, one poetaster rhymes
mouse with sous, treating sous as a singular noun.
Even the comparatively competent Trumbull writes:
Compound of Phoebus and Bellona.
The prose writing seems vastly superior. Arbuthnot's History
adroitly the humorous atrocity story suggesting that the ministerial
troops should castrate the American males. It is possible, however,
The themes reflect the controversies of the age. The Quebec Act
with its threat of popery provoked a great deal of irrelevant
reputed irreligion laid him open to attack. The rebel propagandists
became increasingly hostile to the king and scornful to the royal
of these representatives of the Crown were duly noted. Their morals
as well as their good faith were impugned. Hessians, Irish, Welsh
were assailed as well as the universally unpopular Scots.
This is a useful and a mildly entertaining book, although its
author does not show that mastery of the political background
very outspoken frankness together with his almost incredible
confidence in his own insights aroused the resentment of many of those
his French readers of Rimbaud's obscene parting rites in the home of
an acquaintance and explains that Lawrence's own ungrateful mocking of
those who had helped him was only to be expected in a great artist.)
Someone as courageous as Lawrence in following the promptings of his
who are more timorous and conventional and it is probably for this
reason that so few of his critics, whether or not they have known him
personally, have been capable of a truly disinterested assessment of
his character and genius.
charges that have been brought against him in the past: that he was a
precursor of Nazism, that he sentimentalized the noble Mexican savage,
and that he earned money to which he was not entitled by publishing
Maurice Magnus's Memoirs. It is only occasionally that he gives
the impression of not wanting to sound too impressed, as, for example,
\pu&eacute;rilit&eacute;s in Lawrence's daily life and in many of his
both the life and the work of Lawrence it is not therefore because he
inaccuracy (his worst inaccuracy is to describe Ursula in The
The principal defect of this book is that it is written in a
resemblances between Lawrence's inner life and his own:
distorts the essential biographical facts but attributes clich&eacute;s of
ALFRED MARNAU: \Ra"uber-Requiem. 123pp. Salzburg: Otto
Alfred Marnau, who was born in Bratislava in 1918 and has lived
distinction of having origins which seem to escape national
quarry and the valley bottoms, and it seemed that the world, my own
earliest novel, The White Peacock. His own home-world dominates
the novels up to Women in Love, is the setting of many of the
tales, and is the world to which he returns in Lady Chatterley.
It is described with a faithfulness that makes Lawrence impressive
familiar original and mysterious. This power to make the known world
Romantics.
The excessive amount of attention at present being given to his
treatment of the sexual relationship (bringing us perilously close to
what Lawrence himself despised as sex in the head) must not be
allowed to obscure the more fundamental truth that he was the latest,
and the most compelling, writer in the English Romantic tradition.
Coleridge's definition of the secondary imagination, with its stress
description of Lawrence's art; and the most illuminating parallel to
the symbolic passages of The Rainbow and Women in Love, in
which this visionary quality is most apparent, are the moments of
This, if not precisely the theme of the collection of essays
of the reader. It is consciously there in Mr. Herbert
way very carefully through the mass of overlapping symbolism in
Women in Love to demonstrate how Lawrence's imagination expands
the details of his story in ever widening arcs of significance, and he
borrows from Mr. R. A. Foakes the term image of impression
primitive ritual pattern of separation &mdash; initiation &mdash; return, and
two other contributors see in Lawrence's use of birds in various parts
of his work a conscious remoulding of primitive ritual.
inclusive, and at the same time more strictly literary, response.
Myths as such draw their power from psychological sources and depend
writer has real access (though he may imagine that he has). His use
of myth, whether he wishes it to be so or not, can therefore be only
part of a larger artistic purpose. The Plumed Serpent is an
irrelevant compared with the drama of the hidden primal mythic
underestimated the book because it has seized upon the superficial
content of the novel and confused it with the story it is really
telling. But it was precisely because the primal mythic
adventure could not form the total substance of a novel that
religious movement led by Ramon which Mr. Kessler rightly regards as
superficial. It is impossible to rescue the myth from the novel.
One is left with something which the modern reader inevitably finds
too thin, too remote, too reminiscent of the world of fairytale; it
matchboard stage that Lawrence has contrived for it. Without the
reality of a fully created novelistic world the myth is itself
Lindenberger does not make this mistake. He begins his essay by
social relations &mdash; which is, in effect, the novel as it has usually
Murdoch &mdash; and the symbolist novel or romance. Lawrence, of
goes on to a discussion of Lawrence's Romanticism, the importance of
This argument is just and in the correct sequence; it puts the
emphasis in the right place. The glimpses of unknown modes of
being are the most arresting and the most memorable things in
entirely to the Romantic experience it ceases to be a novel. Nor is
it true to say that the traditional material serves as a foil to set
off the episodes in which Lawrence is more deeply engaged. The finest
history they are already unrivalled, and their characters (in spite of
~You mustn't look in my novel for the old stable ego of the
word. Above all, his power to render environment in language that not
merely describes but re-creates it (Mr. Mark Schorer writes of this
sensuous particularity. In these novels there is no question of an
inner meaning being the true purpose to which the surface of the novel
fuses with the known to form an indivisible artistic unity.
Lawrence the novelist is perhaps now beginning to get his due.
The same cannot yet be said for Lawrence the poet. Miss Dallas
Kenmare has written a small study of D. H. Lawrence, which is in
fact a study of the poetry, but one weakness of that book is its
Lawrence expressed in Pansies and Nettles. Even Mr.
Professor Moore) is undoubtedly the best thing yet written on
Lawrence's poetry, seems reluctant to give the blunt, sardonic quality
its full value. He comments excellently on Red Geranium and Godly
Mignonette: ~There is neither a jot of pretentiousness in the
poem, nor of vulgarity, though the opportunity for both certainly
sharply aware, never half-asleep, whole man &mdash; created by Lawrence's
persuasively as to leave the greatness of Lawrence's poetic
What Lawrence owed to his working-class background has received
Heart. Their full significance has yet to be appreciated. Two
items in the Miscellany have some bearing on this &mdash;
unintentionally supporting one another. The first is a letter from
Katherine Mansfield to S. S. Koteliansky describing a row between
Lawrence and Frieda at Zennor in 1916. Katherine Mansfield is shocked
but the next day gives her breakfast in bed and trims her hat.)
Lawrence. Mr. Williams's cool remark that comment on
working-class life tends to emphasize the noisier factors
inevitably throws one back to the Katherine Mansfield letter. Frieda,
of course, was a German aristocrat, and by 1916 Lawrence had come a
good way from Eastwood, but is it not possible that their middle-class
friends were witnessing in these open rows the continuance of a
all part of a continuous life which, in good and bad, makes for a
whole attachment, and the relevance of this to Lawrence's own
No one, however, is as good, or as prolific, a commentator on
after many years of being out of print is a happening of some
some interesting for what they add to our understanding of Lawrence's
existence of a collective meaning, subtly influenced by the presence
of the author (which is always felt in Lawrence's work), can be more
easily perceived in the sum of Phoenix.
The parts can be exasperating. Lawrence's hectoring manner in
sounds after a while like wilful crudeness. Yet overriding these
intelligence &mdash; an energy that drives towards real understanding, as
against the neat and clever formulations that are so often passed off
for understanding. One's irritation evaporates.
There is much talk in Phoenix of the blood-consciousness
of twentieth-century self-consciousness. Sometimes in his hatred of
its evils he seems to want to sweep away the whole of modern science
the influence of William Morris's News from Nowhere. But when he
is saying more precisely what he means Lawrence makes it clear that
railing against the machine, as if it were an evil thing.
SCIENCE SURVEY 2. Edited by A. W. HASLETT and JOHN
A year ago the first volume in this series successfully
20 to 30 working scientists to report on the progress made in selected
and limited fields which are their particular concern. They appear
grouped together, three or four at a time, under more general heads,
presupposed, though in spite of its clarity this could not be a
seems aimed in particular at the sixth-former beginning to specialize,
who ought to be given every chance to read such first-hand accounts of
the advances made in subjects whose dead past is already all too
puts it explicitly:
Today, when the demand for more and more recruits in the
different branches of science has become so insistent, it is of the
early aroused by having accounts of current trends in scientific
research presented in a readily intelligible style.
FUTURE EFFECT
Surveys such as these at regular intervals may well have a real
effect on the future through their power to draw the attention of
to pure physics is a description of recent tests of the particular and
testing the theory of continental drift. These are particularly
stimulating because little can be taken for granted in sciences at so
complex and unsettled a stage.
DEEP WATER
After the earth come the oceans, with observations of the sea
floor and of currents. A study of plant life in the sea makes the
accounts of work on the transmission of nerve impulses and the
animals to learn, the measurement of human mental qualities, their
on behaviour. This is a particularly controversial area in which
irrespective of their consequences, must always primarily be a medical
We return to solid scientific ground with the assessment of noise
annoyance, the strength of materials, metal fatigue, and materials for
use at high temperatures. Altogether this is a useful piece of work,
which has increased our debt to the British Association.
THE REAL FRANCE
This is a shorter version, in French, by M. Armand B&eacute;gu&eacute;,
of a much longer American sociological study compiled by Mr.
Laurence Wylie of Harvard University, using the field techniques
of sociology, anthropology and psychology, applied during Mr.
Wylie's year's stay in 1950 with his wife and two sons in a village
which he calls Peyrane.
He presents not a dull statistical treatise nor a light
e.g. the basic principles of French education and comparative
family budgets. Nor does he neglect the individual and his
psychological reactions &mdash; the village grocer's tirade against la
reportage. There are two maps, an adequate vocabulary and intelligent
questions in French at the end of each chapter. The author's many
excellent photographs make an integral and illuminating contribution
French life and to show how a group of French people live from day to
This is a fascinating book, from the evocative drawing on its
tractors, television and main drainage and providing a useful
library and could be a stimulating basis for a non-literary sixth-form
OXFORD PAPERBACKS
issued as an Oxford Paperback (Oxford University Press, 7s. 6d.).
Ernest Barker's Principles of Social and Political Theory (price
Sloman, fulfils the need for a new, modern text of the play. It is
based on the text in the 1636 edition of La Primera Parte de
Comedias and takes into account the two \Parte texts of 1640,
the Vera Tassis edition of 1685 and the Zaragoza version of 1636. It
thus makes use of, as no previous edition has done, all the known
texts of the play. Professor Sloman has brought spelling up to date,
In the Introduction he has covered every aspect of the play under
the headings of Date, Sources, Structure and Theme, Language and
ardent student, the clear and concise manner in which the material is
presented makes it interesting and easily digestible for the general
Theme is discussed very fully, with frequent references to the play
Throughout, he indicates Calder&oacute;n's subtlety as a dramatist. A
list of books is provided for further reading on the subject under the
which present difficulty in comprehension, and differences between
Calder&oacute;n's vocabulary and syntax and those of present-day Spanish.
For further assistance, a short index of annotated words and names is
make the book admirably suited to school use. It is certain to
commend itself quickly to the notice of the examining boards.
gained rapidly in popularity. Few people would attempt to take up
pleasures the sport has in store; how to practise in a swimming bath;
Many people must have been excited by the thrills and perils of
the pleasures could be had without the dangers. For although snorkel
PRACTICAL INORGANIC AND ORGANIC PROBLEMS. By M. BROWN.
Longmans. 4s. 9d.
It is true, as the author says, that practical chemistry in
application of the principles involved.
Some university boards and scholarship awarding bodies have used
this approach for a long time and the author has been able to use many
of the problems which have been set for their examinations. To
devised. In the organic section he has included a number of reaction
schemes in which the student is required to carry out tests on the
original, intermediate and final products, which serve to enlighten
the deductive processes.
The function of the book is highly commendable. Most teachers,
however, faced with the difficulty of raising the largest number of
will shrink from embarking on a scheme which, however educative,
candidates will achieve.
The university boards could support the author's initiative by
THE WEAVER'S BOOK. By HARRIET TIDBALL. Macmillan, New York.
38s. 6d.
a book for the absolute beginner. It is, however, an excellent
explore the many possibilities of design in this ancient craft.
In addition to chapters on the loom, yarns and preparations for
weaving, much of the book is devoted to drafting and a thorough
description of the various possible weaves. The 109 drafts
the result of much practical experience and contains much sound
advice, not only for the beginner but also for the more practical
YOUNG WRITERS ON THE MOVE
performance here, at the Arts Theatre, he is better known as a
dramatist on the continent and in New York. On the evidence of The
Death of Bessie Smith and The American Dream, the double bill at
we have often seen plays by the most promising of playwrights spoiled
hour into a full theatrical evening.
go to work; her old father, dreaming of past splendours, is infuriated
by the blues wailing out of his daughter's gramophone.
CARNE'S STUDY OF YOUTH'S AIMLESSNESS
THE youth whose symptom is a strange restlessness and a
The setting is St. Germain-des-Pres and the Latin Quarter of
Paris, but it could be anywhere where semi-students and semi-idle
ACTING AWARDS
Marcel Carne does not condemn them; he believes that their way
through this film, some of these adults will wake up to their
Les Tricheurs was the most successful film to be shown in
Mummers In Play Debut
Arthur Miller, shortly to be presented again for the Arts Theatre,
C.U. Mummers will give the first Cambridge presentation of The
Dream of Peter Mann by Bernard Kops at the A.D.C. Theatre next
production at the Arts two years ago caused such widespread interest.
entertainment.
It is to run at the A.D.C. from Tuesday to Saturday of next
week at 8.15, with a 2.30 matinee on Saturday.
GUINNESS AND MILLS CONFLICT
affection of his men by leading them through the war, and the other a
hard, efficient newcomer who is heartily disliked by the majority of
the soldiers.
regiment forms the basis of the plot, while the affairs of the
glamour into this tough and tragic film.
Supporting roles are played by Dennis Price, John Fraser, Kay
Following the West End stage success of The Spider's Web,
Agatha Christie's thriller has now been made into a film starring Jack
The action covers one day in the lives of the occupants of a
pleasant country house who find they have a body on their hands
shortly before the arrival of an important foreign diplomat.
endeavour that the plot develops, drawing into it a number of
mysterious suspects.
daughter of the household, the film also enables David Nixon to make a
guest appearance.
The Glass Menagerie, thought by some American critics to
be Tennessee Williams' greatest play, it is undoubtedly his most
heart-felt, has not yet been performed professionally in Cambridge.
Three, a new company recently created by Charles Vance, who will
Three, Imogen Moynihan has experience in management as well as being
Ipswich, Northampton, Cromer and other theatres in East Anglia. Ben
cast that is an unusually well-balanced team.
Backstage Slums
which could be vastly improved at small cost, declares the quarterly
It calls on all members of the British Actors' Equity Association
to write asking their M.P.s to urge the Government not to omit
theatres from the proposed legislation concerning amenities in shops
and offices.
WHERE PAINTS &amp; MUSIC GO TOGETHER...
MUSIC and painting live side by side complimenting
each other at Pampisford Mill, the home of the
Campbell-Taylors.
While her 24 years old daughter practises at her grand piano,
Mrs. Campbell-Taylor is often painting at the other end of their
companion, she said.
yards from the front door and provides just the setting of this
Brenda Moore. Specialising in portraits she resumed her profession
five years ago having seen her daughter launched in her own career as
Brighton School and was awarded a local scholarship. When she was 20
One of the first visiting members of the Royal Academy to
mounts for her water colours and drawings.
Although her painting career was interrupted, she helped her
You never lose the ability to paint once you have absorbed the
first principles in art &mdash; practise  is not as essential in
On the difference between the professional and the amateur
income or pay packet.
its own monetary value in these days.
children, so I asked if she particularly enjoyed this type of work.
particularly interesting and often a challenge. She usually stays
with the family and makes studies of the child when asleep before
attempting the painting. You really have to get an idea of the
personality and form before you start.
the painter to paint.
Clay Modelling
The fun of portrait painting, she added, is in trying to
painting.
As an artist she has learned a considerable amount from clay
one of the anointing of the Queen Mother, then Queen, at the
And recently Mrs. Campbell-Taylor had two drawings at the Royal
Society of Portrait Painters' Exhibition.
...AND A STUDIO THAT WILL BE LIT BY GLASS DOME
I MET another artist who will soon be living in a mill &mdash; this
time a windmill at Hemingford Grey.
currently exhibiting her work in Cambridge, hopes the conversion of
the windmill will be completed by the early autumn.
and many times, like Jimmy Edwards, she has attempted to buy it, at
last being successful.
Frame Problem
The family &mdash; she has a son at Trinity and one daughter &mdash; will
art teacher in a London school during the week.
The day I met her she had a problem on her hands. One of her
paintings, 8 ft. by 5 ft. was sent unframed to the Women's
Mrs. Jackson is an extraordinary  prolific painter.
In one year she paints more than 200 pictures, though not all these
Other Interests
She is passionately fond of cooking. Having lived in
Germany for several years she always cooks their national dishes for
Her other interest is collecting Victoriana. When she first
which she is sure will now fetch somewhere in the region of &pound;30.
Work Of Reychan Exhibited At Heffer Gallery
THE Heffer Gallery have just opened an exhibition of the
he is of the fifth generation in a family of potters &mdash; but heredity
Almost everyone must have seen his pieces of pottery sculpture at
some time or another. The shiny little black bulls, with curly
foreheads lowered; the rather pear-shaped Adam and Eve figures sitting
happily under a snake-entwined tree in a pottery Eden &mdash; pieces like
Reychan has exhibited in the Open Air Exhibitions in London, and
the tradition which produced the exquisite pieces of Bow and Chelsea,
and the curiosities of Staffordshire.
personalities, are undeniably works of art of a very vital and
not without dignity.
Two companion pieces, Lion and Unicorn, are rather attractive;
Hercules (taming a lion), Silenus (his arm thrown blissfully over a
P.O.
well-suited to the available talent, and in general commendable for
its boldness, fluency and straight forward interpretation.
scenery other than an odd chair or table to relieve the bareness of
success.
The Post review of next week's shows
THE team behind the longest running musical in the world
West End the week after it has finished at the NOTTINGHAM THEATRE
on August 3.
Wildest Dreams is set in Nelderham, a country town in
reporter sent to write up in satirical terms the town's reactions to
chance in a previous Slade-Reynolds musical, Free as Air, and,
apart from pantomime and repertory experience, has been in
was also in Free as Air, as well as Follow That Girl. Aged
With Julian Slade at the piano, Miss Reynolds plays the
domineering aunt, who meets a composer who tries to sing his own songs
numbers are by Basil Pattison, and decor by Brian Currah, who recently
designed for The Caretaker.
items by various authors, produced by Val May before he leaves for
Bristol Old Vic. Targets range from the familiar skits on Beat the
topped by Rhoda Lewis and Arthur Blake.
Following the same formula of a tearaway technique compounded
the Chair is Dentist on the Job at the ABC and
METROPOLE cinemas. In this, the manager of a firm putting out a
new toothpaste (Eric Barker) gets a couple of dentists to endorse it.
It seems a good opportunity for the Dean of King Alfred's Dental
College (likewise Eric Barker) to unload a brace of recently graduated
up schemes to promote the new paste. In the process they meet Shirley
Their biggest achievement, however, is when they hear that the
recording of goodwill for seven years. Now if a tape extolling the
virtues of their toothpaste could be substituted...?
on the Dalmatians in One Hundred and One Dalmatians at the
ODEON. Each dog wears 32 to 72 spots, depending on which side is
exposed to the viewer &mdash; which accounts for 6,469,952 dancing spots.
Which is only right and proper in a 4,000,000-dollar production
involving 800 miles of drawings, 1,000 colours and 800 tons of paint.
The most sophisticated to date of Disney's 53 features, One
owns a Dalmatian called Pongo and a shapely girl who owns one called
and soon fifteen beautiful puppies are born (to the Dalmatians, that
is). But enter a villainess, Cruella De Vil, rich, cunning and with a
Scotland Yard is baffled, but the dogs of London get on to the scent.
With Gunlight at Sandoval, Tech. Texas Ranger Tom
Tryon avenges death of friend killed trying to prevent bank hold-up.
UN representative of the tiny country of Concordia, so small that
even UN colleagues can't locate it on the map. But the President
wants to keep it that way, knowing that when it is discovered it will
be either swamped with aid or blown OFF the map. Love and
laughter, he feels, engender more happiness than politics or
At a meeting of the United Nations he causes pandemonium by
Moulsworth, both of whom insist on giving his country aid. Keeping a
been reduced to a handful of cowardly citizens as one sheriff after
another is murdered or run out of town in the monthly beat-up the
the massacre of harmless Mexicans. In desperation of ever getting a
new sheriff who can protect them by law, the townsfolk hire Henry
Fonda who will be able to use his fast gunplay and be above the law.
With Between Heaven and Hell, CinemaScope, Terry Moore
feels that the feudal attitude husband Robert Wagner has towards the
MECHANICS: There Was a Crooked Man. Ex army
After a few successes, the gang disguise themselves as American army
Susannah York. Alfred Marks.
With Trapeze, crippled and embittered by a fall, circus
solve an emotional triangle involving Gina Lollobrigida.
explains why Coca-Cola sells very well in Japan. A pretty young co-ed
she has an affair. Discovering herself pregnant she has an abortion,
but her lover couldn't care less and goes off on a ski-ing trip with
the girl in the next apartment. Junko moves out of his flat and goes
meaning of love and happiness. X-certificate.
Phillipe Lemarre has been the scapegoat of some doubtful pals in
have taken over. With the help of blonde mannequin Nicole Courcel,
the released prisoner pieces the story together.
forever searching for real love in Montmartre. When her protector is
betrayed to the police she gets entangled with other shadowy creatures
The Post review of next week's shows
her vivacity in musicals, and the other for his assinities
The ex Cochran young lady and the monocled ass of so
many pieces of Ben Travers at the Aldwych are cast respectively as a
the run from his virago of a wife until she discovers that she is also
harbouring a stolen diamond necklace. The writer has a house staff of
and a lock-picking butler. The play is on its pre-London tour.
when she was ten years old, and took to revue five years later. She
Lawrence in America, and when she came back to London she twinkled for
After Another to the famous Evergreen which, as well as being
NEARLY 80
since 1900 (when he appeared in King of Terrors at Wigan), and
in Hyson Green, Nottingham, when the Grand was a going concern. He,
with farce through such classics of foolery as Cuckoo in the
Nest, Thark and Rookery Nook.
Mr. Lynn and his bald sparring partner appeared at the Theatre
Horses. They were together again two years later in Peter Jones's
tour of The Bride Come  Back with Jack Hulbert and
Second Post twenty-eight items of song, sketch and dance by
various authors. Two of them have just been sold for the new West End
sick joke.
train journey often prompts complete strangers to strike up a casual
conversation. They will talk about the weather, politics or crime.
by F. Leslie Winters
Hollywood decides that 1961 won't be a Super Colossal year
HAVING looked back on 1960 last week, it is now time to think
of 1961 and the films it will bring.
that, after preliminary box-office results of The Alamo and
of their types.
Anderson has also made the drama-thriller The Naked Edge with
American Gary Cooper and British&sol; U.S. Deborah Kerr. Peter
No Love for Johnnie, while Peter Sellers stars and directs a big
SOPHISTICATED
the Tall.
cast you could pretty well guess, and Macbeth, with Maurice
will give us Nearly a Nasty Accident; Ian Carmichael and
be with Janette for His and Hers.
HEART-THROB
There is much prophecy that the new heart-throb of the year
will be Warren Beatty, over here to star with Vivien Leigh in a sordid
drama called The Roman Spring of Mrs. Stone. Warren is
co-star with Ronald Lewis and Ann Todd in a thriller, Taste of
have Max Bygraves in a serious film about slum school life, Spare
the Rod, and Virginia McKenna returning to the screen for a tense
drama set in Sweden &mdash; Two Living, One Dead, in which she will
co-star with husband Bill Travers.
This is D-Day &mdash; in four different versions
been purchased for filming. But Darryl Zanuck is first with details
view. I would like Monty's view of Zanuck's statement: The theme
will be the stupidity of war. The Allies made every conceivable
Unbelievable blunders on both sides took place. How the Americans
A PITY this country hasn't anything comparable with the
Hollywood Motion Picture Museum. A big new building is now planned to
house nearly two million pounds worth of equipment dating to the
out on a tour of one-nighters &mdash; in West Bromwich this week &mdash; he
recorded two numbers, Shine and The Switch (Pye 7N15322).
On the top half he chants away happily; the backer is purely
Bill Bramwell's Candid Camera Theme (Decca F11309) is a most
half, Frederika, brings a more orthodox musical combination into
the picture with this slow, almost haunting, bluesy piece. Two good
sides.
FILM PAGE
TREAT
THEY say (and I don't quite know who they are) that
I have heard film executives express doubts whether a Seventh
Veil type of theme would capture people's fancy today in the
Song to Remember, in which Cornel Wilde played Chopin &mdash; made in
wartime and which captured people's hearts as well as ears.
I should be sorry to think so, for Song Without End, which
tells some of the story of Franz Liszt, is a film worth going to for
its music, its decor, its acting, and its elegance.
certainties for the script-writers. Their private lives, mainly, were
as wildly romantic and as full of drama as any novelist's inventions.
Even so, there is usually a tendency to soften the outlines,
of passion, piety and regret.
But jarring moments are remarkably few in the two hours and ten
The film's inference at the end is that the composer has found
The picture also merely includes two women in his life (from the
many who caught his eye) &mdash; French Countess Marie, with whom he ran off
to Chamonix and whom he deserts to start another concert tour,
the Czar &mdash; formidable adversaries.
FRUSTRATION
The personal side of the story shows the frustration and
bitterness of the discarded mistress, a beautiful piece of acting from
The musical side ranges from Chopin to Wagner, Beethoven to Bach,
who makes of Liszt an irresponsible but rather lovable puppy-dog
deserves to be.
An experiment in the shadows
IT is strange that a Hollywood actor should get the idea for
a film in a New York students' loft on January 14, 1957, and a few
interview, make this film in the streets of that city and then fail to
Cassavetes came to England to find someone who would take a risk on
something new.
16mm camera in 42 days and nights in New York marquees, in disguised
dust-bins, from trucks, in subway entrances and restaurant windows.
For six weeks the actors, all unknown to the general public,
lived together and discussed the story outline.
the characters (which bear the same names as the actors), and when the
in their minds or were provoked by others.
The result, if not completely satisfying (some scenes do appear a
It may not be a film for everyone, but it is an experiment that
by ROBBIE ASHLEY
Secrets of the Candid Camera
SO often have I heard suggestions that Candid Camera is
rigged that I decided to find out just how they go about
eavesdropping on the public.
An ABC spokesman was quite adamant in refuting the charge of
and Mrs. Public.
The only professionals employed on the show are Jonathan Routh
Obviously they are required to set up the victim.
Tiny radio microphones are dotted all over the place &mdash; Routh
often wears a lapel microphone which only a person in the know could
detect. An aerial runs down the trouser leg from the radio
scene is set.
Several sequences are shot in one day. For instance, in a
hardware shop Routh asked a woman to fill in a form to obtain a
Thousands of feet of film are shot every week, and a tremendous
amount is wasted. Sometimes a stunt does not come off; sometimes
With so many problems to solve, it would be a great help to
select some one problem which might be the key to all the others, and
felt by modern critics are due to the book being read and examined as
it was never meant to be. There is some truth in this contention, and
one must always remember that no book of the New Testament was written
with the special interests of a modern critic in mind. Many of the
were of no interest to the author of the Gospel. However, this kind
of the contrasts with the other Gospels and of the striking unanimity
of scholars who have detected dislocations in the text. That the
Loisy, who could not accept this view, was excommunicated in 1907
after a Biblical commission had answered three questions on the Fourth
first article affirmed the authorship of the apostle John. The second
said that the problems which arise from the comparisons with the
author wrote. The third article excluded any allegorical
problems of the Fourth Gospel by explanations based on assumed textual
dislocations. The present state of the Gospel is the result of an
fragments, or sheets, or pages, in order. Most of those who expound a
few leave it open to suppose that the original book had been revised
even before the upheaval.
The ingenuity of the theories is impressive and is the best
argument against them. If the history of the Gospel has been as
critic hopes to discover order, sequence and purpose. The textual
for his spiritual insight and at the next is rolling dice.
Fortunately, the introduction of chance into these schemes makes
it possible to test them statistically. The result confirms the
which they contain. The exponent of such a theory has seen some
original was written, and that the disorder was due to some
observation because it is incomplete and has been wrongly developed.
The third type of theory would account for the difficulties of
the Fourth Gospel in terms of its having been, at one time, a shorter
book than it now is. In the enlargement of this little Gospel some
The Commentator has long been a leading exponent of such a view.
enlargement. A theory of this kind offers considerable advantages.
It can explain the early substratum undoubtedly present in the
Gospel, and yet also account for passages which are not easily
Jesus's life and work. It can offer a reason for the textual changes
which is neither chance nor accident &mdash; two terms which too often cover
the absence of any reason.
The one real weakness of the Commentator's case is that, in
common with all his colleagues, he has not, until now, been able to
to explain the textual movements by showing that such changes are part
of a simple and coherent plan. To understand how this is possible it
Chapter 3
the version which is most likely to have been the original wording.
The most convenient one for the authors has been the text of A.
just over 1,000 different nouns, verbs, and other parts of speech
occurring 15,695 times in their different grammatical forms. There
are other texts which could have been used, and (as shown in Table
1) it is not a matter of the greatest importance which text is used.
is rather large. But the British text includes the paragraph
7.53-8.11, the Woman taken in Adultery, and this accounts for 178
words out of 279, which is the difference between the 15,695 words of
scribal emendation, and it must be included in the Gospel and studied,
even if the result of the study were to decide that the paragraph
should then be excluded. Thus the difference between Souter's text
Gospel is taken as the average of the two figures, then the difference
not much is of consequence, for the variant readings often concern
Gospel would have been written by hand in individual letters; block
capitals are the nearest equivalent today. There would be no spaces
between words such as we are accustomed to see and punctuation would
interrogation mark are all modern additions to the text. The chapter
in Greek.
indicated by a little bar drawn under the first two or three letters
marking, but others were also used. Dots sometimes served in place of
Frequently \paragraphos markings were omitted. C. H.
some markings would be used, although which, it is impossible to say.
Professor E. G. Turner is inclined to take the view that the
original of the Gospel would be unmarked.
invariable practice of ancient manuscripts. A common size of column
instrument was a stylus, a wedge-shaped pen cut from a reed. The ink
The paper would be papyrus or parchment, and the form of the
book a roll or codex.
If, twenty years ago, one had asked a scholar what form the
original of the Gospel would have taken, he would have answered,
without hesitation, that the book would have been a papyrus roll. The
make a book of this kind, sheets of papyrus were glued edge to edge
until a single sheet, often twenty to twenty-five feet wide, had been
made. The edge of this sheet was attached to a wooden dowel and the
tells of the use of papyrus in roll-making. As Pliny was killed in
the eruption of Vesuvius which overwhelmed Herculaneum and Pompeii in
A.D. 79, his information is contemporaneous with the New
Testament.
Normally the sheets were bound in groups, called quires, and the
quires were stitched together to make a book. A common size of
great variations in the codex form; some have single-sheet quires, but
most have multi-sheet quires. Some codices were made up of double
Against these advantages the codex was fragile and might be bulky.
It is sometimes possible to tell whether or not a particular text
was written on a roll or a codex. Rolls were prepared for writing,
was longer than the roll, a sheet could easily be glued on. The verso
of the roll was blank, and one cannot think of an author, Mark for
side of his roll was unused.
single-sheet quire, an extra sheet glued on might have to be gummed on
10
Architecture
THE history of Congregational worship and of its habits of
praise is a complex study for which many more pages would be required
than we have here at our disposal. A simple but serviceable way of
images: that of a seventeenth-century meeting-house, that of a
Tadley, Hants; or any of those whose appearance is preserved only in
faded prints in the vestries of more modern churches; then consider
Union Church, Brighton, or Elgin Place, Glasgow, or Westminster
the new churches at Banstead, Surrey, Pilgrim Church at Plymouth, or
(on a larger scale) Southernhay, Exeter, or Eltham, Kent, or
Whatever particular churches the reader holds in his imagination,
be expressed in the progression through three phases &mdash; Family,
Audience and Community. In any given place the emphasis may be on any
one of these phases: in any given building you may well find a blend
of two or all of them, or a kind of halted transition from one to
another. But very broadly it can be said that the period from the
beginning to 1750 is the family period: that from 1750 to 1900,
the audience period; and that from 1900 to the present, the
conurbations of industrial society is oratory: and that comformable
community.
Your meeting-house has the aspect of a dwelling-house, and its
windows which are later diversified by that very characteristic design
meeting-house made into its own kind of ecclesiastical architecture.
vertically as well as horizontally. The technique of speech
appropriate to such a building does not demand a high pitch of voice;
reasonably careful enunciation and a moderate voice are all that are
needed, and the very long discourses which were beloved of classic
Dissenters could be delivered, and presumably listened to, in
larger church. Now it is always assumed that this larger church was
built in order to accommodate a larger congregation, or to minister to
a rapidly growing district. That is only a part of the truth, because
pulpit centrally, but at the end of the church; the congregation now
number of its members the preacher was remote. Were practical
proportions would have met the need. It was never in fact constructed
What mattered to the nineteenth-century Congregationalists was
possibilities of reaching much larger numbers of people locally had
more eloquent: towers or spires suggested aspiration and domination
suggested their conviction that a meeting house must look like a
church. And that tradition of large-scale evangelistic preaching
which was already well established by 1850 (which was the first year
of a peak-decade in Congregational church building) made the idea of
meeting-house intimacy give way in the minds of the designers to that
attendant ceremony. Nineteenth-century Congregational churches are in
themselves ceremonious buildings. The space is still used with
accommodate the kneeling posture for prayer. But from outside the
just beginning (the Great Exhibition of 1851 had a good deal to do
with that) brought about the familiar and somewhat aesthetically
this kind &mdash; the pattern of organ-pipes behind the pulpit and directly
in the focus of the congregation's visual attention. It has to be
builder usually found that in a Dissenting church his instrument had
advantage, than when it was tucked into a transept in some ancient
parish church.
The modern Congregational church differs as widely from that of
1850 as does the middle-period one from the meeting house. The
reasons are quite simple. In modern times the social activities of
a more significant share of the church's space. In your 1850 church
dramatic contrast between the sumptuous appointments of the building
These are sometimes actually placed underneath the church building:
if not there, they are huddled behind or alongside in an apologetic
heap. By contrast, your full-scale church plant of today makes
the Sanctuary only the centre-piece of a systematic group of
too scarce to permit pretentious architecture &mdash; your modern
Congregational church is much more modest in its outward deportment
than was that of your great-grandfather. But along with it are many
possible to erect a complete system of buildings: but in such cases it
social activities, youth clubs, departmental children's worship,
week-night meetings, and so forth: and when nothing better can be
accommodating the ancillary activities under the same roof, or in
provide seating for a large crowd of worshippers. Not only is the
building fairly small: its floor-space is not used up to anything like
the same extent. The restful effect of bare space, especially at the
front of the church, has now been recognized and admitted. Chairs,
symbols of congregational adaptability, have replaced in many places
rootedness of classic and late-puritan Congregationalism. A central
ceremonious regard for the Communion Table, brought by the
the pulpit to the side of the church. The long rather than the
is in a modesty and simplicity of demeanour which deny directly the
pretentiousness.
There are, of course, many existing examples of churches which
Birmingham, for example, though of massive size and accommodation,
exterior. St James's, Newcastle, another famous down-town
church, combines a fairly square plan with an unusual sense of dignity
and ceremony imparted by the use of fairly massive pillars and an
imaginative dispersal of the pews radially from the central focus of
the pulpit. The oval experiment at Wellingborough, though over-large,
was clearly an attempt to reproduce on a large scale something of the
seven-sided plan, is the most impressive of all modern attempts to
congregation is arranged to move out from the pulpit towards each of
traditional appearance, being large, long, centre-aisled and
side-pulpited but with no features especially eloquent of new trends.
pattern, could hardly be less like a meeting-house, and is very
ceremonious in its demeanour: and its community buildings, such
difference between the new church built in a new housing estate and
the new church built to replace an old one on or near the old site:
domestic architecture of a pleasant village street by a somewhat
ill-considered siting of the whole plant.
But the pattern is in general clear enough: and it is but one
aspect of a pattern of development that can be seen in the habits of
worship of the various ages of Congregationalism.
In its classic days there was enough of the Anabaptist and
enough of the Quaker in most Congregationalists to ensure that any
were unnecessary, and would have been thought an intrusion. The
the crisis-outlook of the persecuted Independents. This is quite
In the eighteenth century, although Dissent settled down to
world of commerce, meaning surplus or credit balance. Life, says
Qoheleth, pays no dividends.
4. all the toil at which he toils
The word for toil is also used of sorrow and vexation. The
emphasis here is not on the physical labour but on the frustrating
of communication in the modern industrial world.
3. under the sun
(cf. Ex. 17.14; Deut. 9.14) and upon the earth (cf.
Gen. 8.17). It means simply alive.
The end of the hastening is to be back where it started. The
childbirth pangs (Isa. 42.14) and the Psalmist's longing for the
commandments of the Law (Ps. 119.131). The figure of the sun as a
participant in a race is familiar, and even before the Exile a passage
in 2 Kings 23.11 suggests a knowledge of it. The thought fits
nowhere!
6. The wind blows... the wind returns
translated BLOWS, GOES ROUND, GOES ROUND AND ROUND, RETURNS ON ITS
strongly in the use of the same root and expresses admirably the
8. the place where the streams flow
The references is  to the underworld, which was
salt-water oceans.
9. the eye is not satisfied... nor the ear filled
with but there is no significance in what they experience. The word
for SATISFIED is used of hunger and appetite. There is food
enough but the hunger never grows less.
the physical world as a soulless process and viewing it sacramentally.
11. there is no remembrance
The full force of this verse is only to be seen when the
significance of the act of remembering in the Hebrew mind is
recognized. The act means more than the recalling of past events.
The very personality of a man continues into the present through his
being remembered. There is an element of present reality in
remembrance would mean spiritual annihilation. Hence the frequency of
Ex. 13.3; 20.8; Deut. 5.15; Isa. 51.1-3; also 1 Cor. 11.25.)
THE SEARCH FOR THE SUPREME GOOD
Under the pseudonym of Solomon, Qoheleth outlines a number of
quests or even experiments he has made in the search for an ultimate
THE QUEST FOR WISDOM
12. I the preacher have been king over Israel in Jerusalem
The author clearly intends to be taken as Solomon. The use of
conviction that neither wealth nor wisdom provided the clue to the
final meaning of life. He uses here Solomon's reputation for
precisely these two features, his renowned wisdom and his ostentatious
flaunting of wealth. His attitude is not that of an admirer, but
Lit. my heart. The Hebrew word \l&emacr;b, frequently
consulting the priest or the prophet and is what is meant by
levels of discussion, and the wisdom derived from the practical
experience of daily living offers no key to the great ultimate
mysteries of the Divine Wisdom.
14. a striving after wind
This is a favourite phrase of the writer and it is used some
seven times in this book. The literal meaning is a feeding on the
wind. The word is used of shepherds feeding their flocks. The
thought is that for all the satisfaction obtained all his quests for
meaning are like trying to make a meal on food that is no more
unsubstantial or illusory. The same note of bitterness is apparent
in either case. All human activity, as far as its final significance
is concerned, is like feeding on the wind or desiring the shadowy
The root meaning of CROOKED is to twist or pervert.
This is a key for human sin. We find our colloquial term
twister near the mark. We note the preoccupation of Wisdom in
its profounder aspect with the problem of sin and suffering.
Lit. I, personally, spoke with my heart.
there is only one candidate for this, David.
In the Old Testament, says Vriezen, knowledge is living in a
to cause what may be called communion. That a man has knowledge of
a relationship that is immediate, rather than second-hand knowing
applaud Qoheleth on the thoroughness of his research when he includes
translated MADNESS means mad revelry and wickedness.
2.1-11
1. I will make a test of pleasure
goodness and joy and the rejoicing associated with religious
Lit. look upon good. This phrase contains the
characteristic Hebrew idiom which uses to see meaning to
and death, happiness and sorrow (cf. Job 9.25; Ps. 16.10; Isa.
much ~Enjoy all that is good as ~Share in the experience of all
to TEST and must be taken in this sense of trying and
experimenting. The typical Hebrew view of life is not a denial of
that Qoheleth had in mind. He is seeking for an ultimate goal to the
merriment and happiness that life does contain in some of its separate
Sam. 21.14; Jer. 25.16; 46.9; 50.38; 51.7.
3. To cheer my body with wine
Lit. to draw my flesh with wine. The phrase is
figurative sense, that is, to stimulate and so to refresh.
my mind still guiding me with wisdom
AV, acquainting my heart with wisdom. The word for
GUIDING comes from a root that is used to describe the herding of
The word used is a strong one, meaning to seize, and it
Lit. I made great my works. This is a reference to the
large-scale building operations which Solomon included in the
construction of his palaces and the palace of Pharaoh's daughter
(cf. 1 Kings 7.1 ff.; 9.15 ff.; 2 Chron. 8.4-6). Close to
of Sol. 8.11).
5. parks
our word paradise is derived. Qoheleth has a second paradise at his
disposal but he is no happier than Adam was! The word is used in the
Stone, which read:
Cf. also Neh. 2.14; 3.15; Isa. 1.30; 58.11; S. of Sol.
7.4; 2 Sam. 4.12.
7. I bought male and female slaves
The acquisition of slaves would be the necessary presupposition
the \mas or forced labour system which Solomon takes from Egyptian
1.11-14).
8. any who had been before me in Jerusalem
Again the mask slips. This rules out Solomonic authorship.
9. my wisdom remained with me
objectivity. This reinforces v. 3. His experiencing of folly as
Prov. 27.20 fo the eyes as the seat of desire. There is no
ff.; 9.6, 9; 11.2). It carries the idea of reward or profit.
relative one and the supreme good is still to be sought.
build it of hewn stone, for if thou lift up thy sword upon it,
thou hast polluted it.
And they shall seek the Shamir, to make an Altar.
According to the legend, Solomon had asked the Prince of the
The Talmud describes that the Shamir lives in a sanctuary, and
only some rare birds know the existence of it.
These birds are, the Cherubim and the Seraphim.
adamant.
The word Shamir was used as a personal name (Git. 68a). The
Hebrew word \SHAMIR means guarded or preserved.
Therefore, the real man, who regards himself as insignificant, as
Such a man is the Shamir that guards himself against all the
irrelevant pleasures. Such a Shamir possesses the real acid to mould
The action of the Shamir writes books and their books are readable.
This Shamir is indeed a rare diamond that incises the hardest rock,
the roof of our security is crushing our soul (see Hab. 2,
10-11). And it is through the Shamir: That the earth shall be
cover the sea. (Hab. 2, 14.)
The Shamir's daily life writes the Decalogue, which is written on
Light which can be read in every language. The Shamir is the
Then the whole earth will be His Altar.
unto my commandments, which I command you this day, to love the Lord
soul. This may seem very good, but there is something deficient.
5.). It is this lack of vision that may make us fail. And without
visionary power the people will perish. But Nature will at first not
season, the first rain and the latter rain, but the consequence
together we cannot solve the further summons of destiny, to solve the
economic problems. Hence says Rabbi Simeon \ben Jochai (Tanis 6a)
power, spiritual power and visionary power is not united, man will
himself only, instead of all to help to gather your corn, your wine
and your oil. Freedom from want cannot be fulfilled nor freedom from
fear, fear of starvation in the midst of plenty. Help will not be
easily forthcoming for the people in need. They will think of the
And you serve Mammon and God. And you cannot serve two masters, and
you worship self-interest, isolating yourself, under such conditions
the goods are your gods. And then the Lord's wrath be kindled
against you, and he shut up the heavens, that there is no rain, and
that the land yield not her fruit and lest ye perish quickly from
off the good land which the Lord giveth you. For without the
vision to serve the Lord your God with all your heart and with all
solved.
And the sequence in the text is different than in the first part of
them to the children any more diligently and the children will grasp
now what will befall them without visionary power.
And we will nail the Divine Law on the door posts of the house
and upon the gates.
them, as days of HEAVEN ON EARTH
The Messusah, which is nailed on the doorposts contains those two
lessons.
The third lesson of the Shmah (Numbers 15, 37-41) is called
tells a story, which is also in the Hagadah that Rabbi Eleasar \ben
37-41, by night, because the fringes (\tsitsits) are only used in
the day; till Ben Zoma came and explained the verse (Deut. 16, 3)
that thou mayest remember the day when thou camest forth out
thought it important that when we read the Shmah to be willing to
hear, we should remember the Great Deliverance: Passover and its
The \Tsitsits and the Hagadah
And the \tsitsits had a message sealed inside the knots just as
Matzo; (2) Bitter Herbs; (3) Salt-water and Charauses (a kind of fruit
mixture in likeness of the appearance of mortar); and (4) an attitude
(1) Matzos is deficient bread, (\LECHEM \ANJO in Hebrew),
so are we deficient without spiritual knowledge, and to cure our
the most important task. Education gives: Freedom of Speech.
(2) Bitter Herbs symbolises the bitterness that is hurled
and that God dwells within us. Self-control gives us: Freedom to
Seder-Table represents the Covenant of the Torah (MELACH BRITH
ELOHECHO in Hebrew, Salt is the covenant of thy God, Levit. 2,
13.) Salt preserves and we should have this salt in ourselves and
have peace with one-another. And the sweet Mortar (the \CHARAUSES
in Hebrew) that binds all the hard-facts together and explains
them, represents the Oral Tradition. We dip into both, at the Seder.
our inheritance. Living the life of the Torah (dipping-in) makes
freedom from want.
(4) We lean back on the Seder-night, that symbolises we are
unafraid, for we are Israel, the Overcomer, the Suffering Servant,
is the \PARDUS.) Matzo represents the literal meaning of Pesach
which is called: The Feast of Matzos. The Bitter-Herbs represent the
spiritual principle and this gives us a wink (Remez) how to live
carries the concealed message.
the Bread of Poverty which our fore-fathers were eating in
Mitzrajim, to show they were willing to learn; and we invite anybody
who wishes to partake in our discussions, saying:
And we want all to eat and drink His Great Philosophy of the four
Seder-evening about these four symbols (the \MANISHTANO).
And the person who asks these questions is seeking the opinion of
without which Society cannot make progress.
And we drink four cups to thank the Lord our God for the
four freedoms which are Divine.
(1) I will bring you out from under the burdens of Egypt.
(4) I will take you to me for a people.
How was it that Israel was brought out from under the burdens of
Egypt? Because, they kept the Passover and they were eating Matzos in
Egypt and the Feast of Matzos was known even to Abraham and Lot.
their place alongside the Bible and Church authority, poured
sanctified oil on troubled waters. There were plenty of
cross-currents in those waters and clergy who would solemnly have
they could conscientiously remain in this comprehensive Church. But
for some of them the path must end in schism.
though it would be, would have become indigenous. And would have been
the primer of saints &mdash; Lancelot Andrewes, George Herbert, Jeremy
Taylor, Margaret Godolphin, and so many others.
Plot spoiled that. The Puritans had high hopes, for James had grown
up in Presbyterian Scotland, but those hopes were dashed. True, a new
faith according to the Catechism following were added. But
in the Lord's Supper.
It was at this time, too, that King James made himself immortal
by becoming associated with a Bible translation &mdash; the Authorized
before. Bacon was at work and Milton was just learning to read.
James was followed by Charles, in whose reign came the Scottish
important Prayer Books in the Anglican Communion.
Forever associated with Charles is Archbishop Laud, now so much
was a hard-hitting battle with the Jesuit, Fisher. But anyone who was
friendly with James and Charles, the Puritans argued, was necessarily
those who had drunk deep at Calvinistic springs.
archbishop do when he found that clergy had lost interest in their
jobs? Or when he found cock-fighting going on in church? Laud made a
Prayer Book was to be respected and so was the office of a bishop.
Altars should be altars and not any broken down, transportable table
lengths to establish the fact. And so he became hated. And executed.
The Puritan leaders were plotting (though they did not use
targets almost indistinguishable. No bishop, no king, said
James. And ~No king, no bishop was the obvious implication.
Charles went even further and asserted a king could do no wrong. In
1629 he dissolved Parliament and announced he would govern by royal
prerogative. There was no outlet for the expanding gases of criticism
English churches suffered yet another despoliation. And Evelyn
the diarist could record Another sad day! The church now in caves
and dens of the earth. To secure such an end men like Will Dowsing
disgusted in one place where he had only 3s. 4d. because
though the country. A dead king and a ravaged Faith. It was these
gloom. These were also the days when Lancelot Andrewes was writing
days, too, of George Herbert, many of whose poems have become
much-loved hymns. It was now that John Cosin, one day to be a bishop,
as soon as opportunity offered. Contemporary with them was Jeremy
Taylor whose Holy Living and Holy Dying have helped so many to
making his fascinating experiments in Christian community living at
An interesting age!
NO Christian can lightly condemn an age and a system of
Rest or John Bunyan and Pilgrim's Progress. It was the same
age, too, which gave birth to George Fox and the Society of Friends.
have been poorer without the particular concept of equality which the
Quakers were to propagate.
Even the brand image of the day, Cromwell, must remain memorable
for many things other than his warts. Dictator though he inevitably
conformity. True, he would have no truck with bishops or a Prayer
matter altogether.
There was still so very far to go.
liberty which forbade them to observe Christmas Day.
England was merry England when
Old Christmas brought his sports again,
more, people wanted God's blessing on their weddings. But only civil
Testament for a religion designed for doughty desert nomads.
human reasons as for ideological motives. It was not so much because
stood was, in the truest sense of the word, unnatural. Christianity
the bells rang out and bonfires blazed as Charles came back.
one example. And there were the Conventicle Act which forbade
which made notorious the name of Clarendon and his code. Then there
was the Test Act which insisted that all civil or military officers
It was such legalistic ham-fistedness which was to make the life
of the Church of England such an artificial observance for so many in
the following century. And such a situation was imposed by the State,
not initiated by the Church.
There is so much one could condemn about these sixties of three
least the 1662 Prayer Book, born under such strange portents. We no
longer look starry-eyed and refer to this incomparable Book.
But we must revise only in the full awareness of what this Book has
meant. First of all, however, we look at its immediate background.
printed. Fifteen years without a Prayer Book had certainly not made
these reprints of the 1604 Book as a stopgap. A revision was clearly
called for and the object of that revision was clearly expressed by
nine bishops who were still alive. The nearer the forms come to the
ancient liturgy of the Greek and Latin Churches, the less are they
Savoy Hospital, that conference met. To it came twelve bishops
As far as the bishops were concerned, it was obvious and natural
argument was therefore placed on the Puritans who had plenty to say.
They wanted prayer to be extemporary and unfettered. There were
wanted Sunday to become the Lord's Day and Sabbatarian gloom to
prevail. It is easy to condemn all this but we must never forget
their very real zeal for righteousness.
some impression on their opponents, but their absorption in details of
little moment was their undoing.
children, as I have already suggested, not to be silly or to pull
themselves together. Far better to help them to face whatever it is
upon completely irrational pre-conceived notions &mdash; or to show how we
may deal with it so as to remove the power to torment us that it seems
Even worse is to laugh. Tremendous damage may be done to a child
by laughing at what are very real fears. As adults, we know that
their fears are groundless, indeed to us they appear laughable, but to
